Chapter 1
=========

Prologue To The Gospel Of Luke
------------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:1-4
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:1
    :bold:

In verse 1 we see that many had written down accounts of the life and ministry of the Lord Jesus
Christ by the time Luke begins his record. We do not know how many but certainly more than the two
or three who wrote the canonical gospels. The word translated “taken in hand” is a compound verb
comprising “cheir” for hand and “epi” meaning upon.

Moreover the infinitive of “Anatassomai” shows that it was their purpose to set it out
systematically, and that the account would be a full and complete one. This clearly indicates that
others had set forth material in a systematic form rather than just notes and anecdotes.  `1 Timothy
3:16, 2 Peter 1:16-19`.

These were not fairy tales; this was the truth that was “most surely believed” by the followers of
Christ. The word used here is used for finality, where a person is convinced, or fully persuaded
about something. This means Luke was fully satisfied after thorough investigation that what he had
received from others was true, and what he has studied and now written was also accurate and the
truth.

Luke had two sources of information as an historian; both written material from others already in
writing, and oral history from the eyewitnesses of the Lord’s ministry.  He will blend these two
sources together in his Gospel account, as a record that Paul’s lawyer can use to exlain to the
Roman Court his client’s belief system and the legality of its tenants and origins.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:2
    :bold:

Here we see that Luke did not claim himself to be an eyewitness but he had interviews with those who
were. We note that the Greek word Paradidomi which is translated “delivered”, is made up of the
Greek words for side by side, and to give. Luke says that here he has been handed down thoroughly
reliable information both oral and written. He was a secondary and not primary witness to the events
of the Gospel, but the material is totally reliable and not fables.  In the Acts record he will be
an eye witness from Chapter 16 and will give us accurate indication of this.

The verb is also in the Aorist Active Indicative, which shows the active way in which they “came
alongside” Luke, and the indicative mood says that this is a reality, they actually did it. In the
second half of this verse the word “were” is the word Ginomai, which means to become something which
they were not before.

These people became eyewitnesses as soon as the ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ commenced. They
had been there from the beginning. This is an old Greek word, and means seeing with one’s own eyes.
This is the only place we have it in the New Testament. This is the word we get the English word
Autopsy from.

Of course they became eyewitnesses once the ministry started. Prior to that there was nothing to
witness. As a result of what they saw they became disciples and became servants to the general
public proclaiming the Word of God.  `Acts 26:16, 24-26, Ephesians 3:7-8, 4:11-12, Colossians
1:23-25`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:3
    :bold:

Luke is seen to be motivated to write an account himself by the example and enthusiasm of the other
reporters of the Life and Ministry of our Lord, but also because he has uncovered more stories than
the others have recorded and he is excited by what he has learned about the faith that saved him.
The word translated “seemed good” means that this is a natural conclusion and justification for Luke
to write his gospel account – he has been “moved” to write.  `Psalm 40:5, 50:21`.

Luke first of all however thoroughly researched the whole subject, so that he knew thoroughly the
subject he was going to systematically set out in his Gospel. In the Greek it means to follow a
thing along in the mind and trace it carefully. In order means cconsecutively, much of Luke is
chronological, but some is topical.  At this time historical accounts were ordered quite differently
than today’s newspaper reporter, but Luke comes closest to a good investigative journalist.  He has
an overall plan to start and he is filling the gaps with facts he has verified.  He wont record
anything that he hasn't verified from someone who was there.

The recipient of this treatise is a person called Theophilus, which means a person loved by God, but
was also a common name of the time. He is also the recipient of Luke’s other canonical work, the
Book of Acts. His title “Most Excellent” indicates that he was a high official in the Roman
Government and may have been a title like “Your Excellency” [see Felix `Acts 23:26` and Festus `Acts
26:25`]. It is of interest that the adjective does not occur when Luke again addresses Theophilus in
`Acts 1:1`.   The suspicion is that this man was the official lawyer for Paul’s case and that the
Gospel and Acts are a legal brief to help defend Paul against the charges to be brought before the
Emperor that he is guilty of spreading an illegal religion.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:4
    :bold:

Here we have the word “Epignosis” which means a thorough working knowledge. We note it is in the
subjunctive mood which shows that the free will of Theophilus is in focus. He had in fact received
instruction in these things, at an earlier point of time as seen in the aorist active indicative of
“Katecheo”.  Luke is fine tuning his knowledge that he might accurately and fully know the facts.
If this man is the lawyer appointed by the court he must be better prepared than the Jewish
opponents he will face.

He therefore has a lot of information. Whether he now consolidates the academic knowledge on the
subject to full working knowledge is however up to him. He has the information but Luke notes his
free will is involved.

The word translated “certainty” is based on the Greek word Sphallo which means to fall or totter and
with the negative prefix “a” means not to stagger, or to be uncertain.

The men doing the teaching were called catechists, based on the Greek word Katecheo, translated
instructed in this and those receiving it catechumens. Whether Theophilus was in the second category
is not known.

Application
...........

We have not inherited fairy tales or fables in the Bible about the Lord Jesus Christ. We have
substantial systematic and thorough information from leading eyewitnesses and in this case one of
the greatest historians of all time, Luke.

Many people were led to write down detailed accounts but only a few of those accounts were inspired
and recorded in the canon of Scripture.

It is of the greatest importance that before you attest to a subject you investigate thoroughly so
that you get a complete picture.

As a result of our meeting with the Lord Jesus Christ, the Living Word we are to be ministers of the
Word.

In order to make proper decisions on a subject we need to have good solid information, then it is up
to us as to whether we pursue it or not.

It is critical that the whole subject is researched and set out systematically. Hence verse by verse
studies are the superior way to study the Scriptures.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/BIBLE:  INSPIRATION`

Announcement To Zacharias Of John The Baptist's Birth
-----------------------------------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:5-25
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:5
    :bold:

In the days of Herod the king relates to Herod the Great. For full coverage as to his lineage see
section 15. He claimed to be a proselyte to the Jewish religion but used Judaism only as much as it
would enhance his secular plans.  He was the archetypal religious criminal figure using people’s
faith to his own political ends and worshipping power alone.

For the first time in the history of Israel the Sceptre had departed from Judah [see `Genesis
49:10`].  As a result it was now time for the Jews to look for another governor from Bethlehem who
should rule and shepherd the nation Israel [see `Micah 5:1-2`].   From the prophetic word of Daniel
in `Daniel 9:24-27` it was clear that these very days were thiose when Messiah would be born.  There
was a great deal of messianic expectation around this period, for the calculation was clear – this
was the day that Daniel spoken of.

Zacharias is the Greek form of the Hebrew name Zechariah.

When the families of the priestly descendants of the tribe of Levi increased in number to an extent
that they could not function in the Tabernacle at the same time David and Solomon divided them into
24 courses or classes so that they might serve by turns, `1 Chronicles 24:1-19`.

Zechariah was in the course of Abijah which was the eighth in the order which had been established.

We note later in this verse that not only Zechariah but also his wife Elizabeth came from the tribe
of Levi. Their son, John the Baptist, was also most well qualified by birth to be a priest being the
son of a father who was a priest and of a mother who was the daughter of a priest.  By both father
and mother he was descended from the family of Amram of whom came Moses, Aaron and Miriam three of
the most illustrious characters in Jewish History.

We thus have a totally qualified king in the Lord Jesus Christ, and priest in the form of John the
Baptist.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:6
    :bold:

Both Zechariah and Elizabeth were righteous before God.  What this means is that they were both
upright and holy in their outward conduct. As believers they were practicing their faith daily in
the presence of God, being aware that He was observing them and their motives.   `Genesis 6:9, 7:1,
17:1, Romans 8:9-25, Philippians 3:4-12`.

They were both found to be mature believers walking with God. Here both of them were so to speak
walking in maturity together before the Lord. They were an unusual and wonderful example to others.

The two words “Commandments and Ordinances” may relate to the Decalogue and the Ceremonial and
Judicial Laws given after the Decalogue as all the precepts in chapters 21 –23  of Exodus are called
judgments or ordinances and this was the basis of the divine regulations to Israel prior to the
giving of the Holy Spirit.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:7
    :bold:

Like a number of prominent people in the Bible before, the couple who were to have a child of
critical importance in the plan of God, were at this point unable to have any children and had been
trying for many years. We see such examples as Sarah the mother of Isaac, `Genesis 15:1-5, 17:1-8,
21:1-7`, and Hannah the mother of Samuel in the Bible. `1 Samuel 1:6-21`.  The couple are now well
into their forties and so having a child at this stage of life is a remote chance; indeed is is by
the miracle of the Lord alone.

In the case of the Lord Jesus Christ as well there was a miraculous birth, not because Mary was
barren, but because she was a virgin at the time of the birth of the Lord Jesus Christ.  It is of
interest that in the case of Isaac, John the Baptist and the Lord Jesus Christ, the birth of these
three were announced in exactly the same way, with God foretelling the birth of Isaac in `Genesis
17:16`, the angel of the Lord announcing the birth of John the Baptist in `Luke 1:13`, and Gabriel
telling of the birth of the Lord Jesus Christ.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:8
    :bold:

Here we see Zechariah undertaking his priestly function before God. “Before God” means that he is in
the Temple, which in time past was the location where God had manifested himself in the form of the
Shekinah Glory. Since the destruction of Solomon’s Temple the Shekinah Glory had not however been
present. On this occasion however the Temple was visited by an angel, and it will later be visited
by the Lord.  The glory of this house will be greater than that of Solomon’s Temple, for this one
will be visited by the Lord of glory, of whom the temple spoke in all its structure and work.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:9
    :bold:

In the Talmud we see that it was the custom of the priests to divide the various areas of temple
service amongst themselves by lot. This meant he received the white stone that signified he had the
particular job that day and in God’s timing it was the very day for him to meet the angel.  As a
result the function allocated to Zechariah was to burn incense at the golden altar near the veil in
the holy place, the outer and larger covered area in front of the veil that covered the Holy of
Holies.

It was only once in a lifetime that a priest obtained the lot for going into the sanctuary and
burning incense on the golden altar. The lot which gave approval was a white stone.  `Revelation
2:17`.  The role he had drawn for this day spoke of the prayers of the priesthood going up to God
from the golden altar in the form of the smoke of the incense.  Zechariah would use this opportunity
to offer up his own prayer for a child, and was going to experience the greatest event in this
temple since it had been built.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:10
    :bold:

Here we see a large group of people outside the Temple praying at the time of the burning of the
incense. The incense burnt on the golden altar represents prayer and praise to the Lord.  The entry
of the priest into the Holy Place was a signal that prayer was to be formally offered from the
golden altar and everyone who had a specific prayer to ask of the Lord would attend the temple at
that time and pray their prayer at the time of the offering, so that as the smoke rose from within
the building they knew their prayer had gone up to heaven also.  `Hebrews 4:9-16`.

Incense was burnt twice a day in the Temple, in the morning and in the evening.  `Exodus 30:7,8`. In
this passage Luke does not stipulate which period was involved in this incident.  There is a holy
spirit of prayer in the temple as Zechariah enters the Holy Place.  There is power in corporate
prayer, and as we enter into the place of prayer we enter the place of blessing and direction, and
this man will receive both.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:11-12
    :bold:

The word appeared in this verse is in the form that Paul used for the resurrection appearances of
Christ in `1 Corinthians 15:5-8`. The appearance of the angel is clearly real as is shown by the
indicative mood.  `Judges 13:3-23`.  These is fear in seeing an angel, for the Hebrew people
realised that to do so was often to die, as the angels are both messengers and judges of men.
`Exodus 12:29-33, Numbers 22:22-35, Joshua 5:13-15`.  Eternity does not touch time without serious
reason and important communication to be received.

Zechariah’s duties for the two week period was to take the coals off the brazen altar representing
the Cross and to bring it into the Holy Place to the altar of incense to burn the incense upon the
coals. The altar of incense also known as the golden altar was made of gold overlaying wood
representing the unique God man, the Lord Jesus Christ.

The means of doing this are set out in the book of Numbers. Priests who violated the principles, and
offered what is called strange fire to burn the incense were killed by God. `Numbers 16`. If God
accepted the offering the priest came out alive, if not he wouldn’t.

If the offering was not accepted by God current Jewish tradition recorded that an angel would appear
on the right side of the altar. This is why Zechariah was filled with fear because he thought his
death was imminent. Zechariah became aware of the angel’s presence and he became deeply troubled.
`Judges 6:22-23, 13:21-23`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:13-17
    :bold:

Verses 13 – 17.  This section takes on a metrical form when turned into Hebrew and is a prose poem
in both the Greek and English, and is like `Luke 1:30-33, 35-37, 42-45, 46-55, 68-70 2:10-12, 14,
29-32, 34-35`.  It is as if Luke was careful to write in such a way that these sections could be
chanted or sung – which would be in accordance with his training as a Greek Doctor, as they had to
learn oratory and poetry also.

In verse 13 Zechariah however is told not to fear, and he hears the good news for his, that
Elisabeth is going to have a son. He is instructed by the angel to call the son John which means
“God is gracious”.  This is not a family name, and so the instruction is clear and definite – he is
to break with tradition here, because something is to be done with and through his son that is
unique and amazing.

In verse 14, the words “shall rejoice” have the concept of, “shall have cause to rejoice” – it would
prove to be a joyful event.  Fear will turn to joy in the Lord.  `Jeremiah 31:13, John 16:20, 2
Corinthians 6:10, 1 Thessalonians 2:19`.

Verse 15 – Great in the sight of the Lord. He was closer in standing to the Lord than any other of
the prophets as seen in `Matthew 11:11`a, “Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women
there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist”

John the Baptist was a Nazarite from his birth, a feature he shared with both Samson and Samuel.
Samson failed spectacularly while Samuel and John the Baptist kept the requirements of their status.
The Nazarite represented purity and dedication whereas the leper represented sin. As the herald of
the perfect king it was entirely appropriate that the herald should demonstrate the purity of the
King. `Numbers 6:1-27`.

Verse 16 – We know from the context of John the Baptist’s ministry that he had a ministry much like
Elijah with turning the people’s heart to the Lord. This is taken from Elijah’s prayer to the Lord
when imploring the burning of the sacrifice at the conflict with the prophets of Baal. [`1 Kings
18:36-38`]. While both had major ministries the nation did not turn to the Lord at either time.

Verse 17 commences with the phrase, “and he shall go before him”. Who is “him”?  By reading back to
the previous verse we see that it refers to the Lord their God. This shows that the Lord Jesus
Christ is “Jehovah in the flesh”, or Emmanuel – literally - “God with us”.  `Isaiah 7:14, 8:8,
9:6-9, 12:1-2`.

“In the spirit and power of Elijah”.  `Isaiah 40:1-11, Malachi 3:1-5`. This indicates that John the
Baptist had a similar holy and devoted life and ministry to Elijah, although he did not perform any
miracles, but he didn't have to, as his role was to point to the one who would.  He served purely as
the herald of the king and the herald does not draw attention to himself.  `John 10:41`. “John did
no miracle but things that John spake of this man were true”

John’s ministry was to the Jewish people to prepare the way for the Messiah – but the Messiah was
rejected and so the herald of the king must come back and prepare the people again, and this second
time the people will respond.  `Malachi 4:5-6` notes that this will occur before the Great
Tribulation period. In addition he was to assist in making the disobedient just and more literally,
“to make ready for the Lord a prepared people”.  `Zechariah 10:12`ff.

John denied he was Elijah in accordance with the Malachi expectation, `John 1:21`.  Jesus will
however identify him exactly as Luke records here, as “Elijah in spirit and power”.  `Matthew 17:12,
Mark 9:12`.  John will turn the hearts of the fathers to their children, who will desire to come to
Jesus – John will challenge all parents to consider their children’s fate if they fail to recognize
their sinfulness, and fail to repent before the Lord.  He will challenge them to be obedient to
Moses, David, Amos, Isaiah, and Solomon, and recognize their need of a Saviour.  `Psalm 10:16-18,
78:5-8, 111:10, Proverbs 2:1-11, Isaiah 29:22-24, Amos 4:12, 1 Corinthians 6:9-11`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:18
    :bold:

Zechariah acted a little like Gideon here, but let us not be too hard on him, as he expected to die
at any second Abraham staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, nor would Mary who did
not ask for a sign.  Zechariah is beside himself, and has deep doubts about things, even though God
has done this before with Hannah, Manoah and his wife, and with Abraham and Sarah.  He looked at
this in a natural light and perspective, only thinking about his prayer as a forlorn hope, but
deeply fearing his wife was just too old to bear any children.

Zechariah was sincere in his desire behind his prayer, and he wanted to say to his lovely wife
Elizabeth that he had really tried, but deep in his spirit he didn't think it was possible, and may
have been doubly concerned at the angel’s appearance - for he was privately praying at the altar of
incense rather than praying for the nation as he was supposed to, and he didn't even really believe
what he was saying!  How gracious God is to us all!  `Hebrews 4:7-16`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:19
    :bold:

Gabriel identifies himself to Zechariah. He is the angel who taught Daniel [ see `Daniel 8:6, 9:21`]
and also will appear to Mary [ see verse 26 below].  His name literally means “man of God”. He says
that he stands in the presence of God as a personal servant/messenger and has been specifically sent
to tell Zechariah the good news about the birth of John.  He uses the name that Zechariah would know
from his own reading of the book of Daniel, and as he announces the coming of the herald of the King
of kings, it is appropriate that it is Gabriel who gives the message.  `Daniel 9:20-27`.  The count
down to Messiah coming is over – the date of his birth approaches, not long after the birth of the
messenger.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:20
    :bold:

Zechariah asked for a sign and got one, he was deprived of the power of speech. We see his ability
to speak return on the birth of his son John in verse 64.  There are consequences for not believing
in the word of God through his messenger angels.  `Genesis 18:9-15, Numbers 20:12, Isaiah 7:9-16`.
Unbelief is sin and sin has consequences.  “Whatever is not of faith is sin”.  `Romans 14:22-23,
Galatians 3:2-11, Ephesians 2:8, Hebrews 3:7` – 4:2.  The one clear and public job the priest had
after burning incense each day was to go outside and stand on the temple steps and announce the
Aaronic blessing upon the people.  `Numbers 6:24-26`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:21
    :bold:

The phrase “they marvelled while he tarried” is in the imperfect tense, meaning that they were
constantly amazed and not a little frightened, that the priest had not reappeared, as the Talmud
says that the priest remained only a short time in the sanctuary.  The priest did not hesitate or
prolong his time, as he was to place the hot coals from the altar, sprinkle the incense as he prayed
for the nation and not linger, but walk steadily to the door again.  He had a small bell attached to
his garment to ensure that priests waiting outside could hear him moving about, and rescue him if he
got anything wrong and died.  The thought of the people was that he had died.  No-one was expecting
Gabriel to speak, as he had not spoken to man since the mid 500s BC.  The prophecy of `Daniel
9:24-26` had not been factored into anyone’s thinking.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:22
    :bold:

The crowd realised that he had seen a vision, as he signed to them, but was unable to speak the
blessing from Numbers aloud. The word perceived is epignosis, which means that they understood -
were very clear in the minds, they had a full knowledge of his seeing a vision.  His signing to them
showed them further proof that he had seen a vision as he clearly indicated that he had seen an
angel form the Lord.  The drama of this event is the first warning to Israel, at the heart of the
temple that spoke of the coming of the Messiah and his work, would have got holy men going back to
the prophetic words of the past.  By the time of Jesus birth they know that it is in Bethlehem that
Messiah is to be born, and they realise that the words of Daniel are unfolding in their day.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:23
    :bold:

We noticed that even though he had been struck dumb Zechariah remained at his post as a Levitical
priest serving until the time of his roster as a priest had been completed and then he went home to
Elisabeth.  When a man was struck dumb he was treated as unfit for the priesthood and would be
removed form his office, but as Zechariah had clearly communicated by sign language, and writing
likely also, that he had seen an angel, he was permitted to continue his function, even though the
debility disqualified all others.

Seeing what had happened, this also shows us that he had a great sense of responsibility, and that
the change in his life at this point had come from God.  His service is lifted up a notch rather
than being distracted by the angelic visitation.  Angelic messengers visiting mankind are very rare,
for they are not needed often, and so when one comes it is with very solemn and significant
information that requires life change on the part of the person visited.  Life is never the same
after an angelic visitation, but worship continues and spiritual service increases.  The fruit of
angelic words to any man or woman is that their worship and spiritual service increases in quantity
and quality.

The Greek word for ministration, “Leitourgia”, is where we get the English word “Liturgy”, or
priestly function from.  It was a common word in ancient Greece for public religious or social
service, the emphasis being on the fact that it was work for, or on behalf of/for the benefit of,
the people. It is seen in `Hebrews 8:6, 9:21, Philippians 2:17, 30` and is common in the papyri for
the service of the Egyptian priesthood.  All spiritual service is “other” focused, as we serve the
Lord’s people on his behalf.  `John 21:15-22, 1 Corinthians 12:7-11, 18`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:24
    :bold:

The word for conceive is used eleven times by Luke, and in every case he is using it in the medical
sense, in relation to the conception of a child.  It is used on five other occasions with James in
`James 1:15` using it for lust “giving birth” to sin.  After Elisabeth had conceived John the
Baptist she became reclusive for a period of five months, which was a common thing for older mothers
to be encouraged to do, even today, to make sure there is no shock or accident that might create
miscarriage – which increases in risk with age.  The Greek word translated hid “Perikrupto”
indicates that she hid herself constantly. It is a composite verb with “krupto” meaning to hide and
“peri” all around.

It is not shame that causes this, but her awareness, from her husband’s communication by writing to
her, that this child is important in the Plan of God.  This is no ordinary child and so she takes
extra-ordinary precautions to ensure his and her own survival.  She doesn't crow about her
pregnancy, but “goes underground”, and waits for the day to show herself and be assured that risk of
miscarriage is now low, and she is ready to give birth to the messenger of Messiah. This is a woman
who can handle the truth and walk humbly in it, and be aware that she is making history without any
arrogance.  This couple are spiritually well chosen by the Lord for their duty to bring this boy up
in spiritual depth.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:25
    :bold:

Barrenness was deeply felt by Jewish women because the husband wanted an heir and because the
believers knew that eventually the Messiah would be born as well as the natural longing for a woman
to become a mother.  The “desire of women” for Jewish women was the desire to be the mother of the
Messiah, as the messianic expectation was high, and all knew that he had to come soon from the time
ticking clock of `Daniel 9:24-26`.  `Hebrews 11:1, 11`.

Application
...........

Both the Lord Jesus Christ and John the Baptist were totally qualified to undertake their respective
roles in the plan of God.  Their parents in each case were spiritually chosen people, who could
handle the solemn responsibility they were given to parent their sons.  Let us be worthy in our
responsibility.

We as Christians with specific gifts are uniquely gifted to undertake our function in the Plan of
God. As with John, whether we function or not in the plan of God involves our volition and knowledge
of God’s Plan.  We are to know the Word, believe the Word, and apply the Word.  `Hebrews 3:7` –
4:12.

We should not be amazed at what God can do even in apparently impossible situations. We can do all
things through Christ who strengthens us daily in the ministries of the Holy Spirit.  `Philippians
4:10-13`.

God can and will solve our problems and ease our heartaches if we are obedient to Him. We need to
know our responsibilities to God and to be persistent and consistent in undertaking the tasks even
at times of turbulence in our life knowing that all things do work together for good. `Romans
8:26-28`.

Elijah will return with Moses as the two heralds of the Second Advent of Christ. Your position in
the Plan of God is of critical importance even though you may consider yourself a failure.  If we
are alive we have a part to play in the plan still. Zechariah failed to believe and was struck dumb
for a time, but he regained speech and he retained his ministry and gained the new one of bringing
up his son in the spiritual family home that would nurture his own spiritual walk with God.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/PRIESTS`
- :doc:`doctrines/PRIESTS:  LEVITICAL PRIESTHOOD`

Announcement To Mary Of Christ's Birth
--------------------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:26-38
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:26
    :bold:

The words “was sent” is in the aorist passive indicative. The aorist tense is the point of time he
was sent, passive voice is the fact that he was sent by God, Indicative mood is the voice of
reality.  The next angelic visitation occurs in the sixth month of the pregnancy of Elizabeth.  This
is the next step in what the great preacher Dr W G Scroggie called the “unfolding drama of
redemption”.  God sends the angel to advise Mary of her choice as the one to bring the
Messiah/Saviour into the world of men.

We notice also that he was sent to Nazareth of Galilee. Nazareth has the meaning associated with the
words for root shoot, branch. `Isaiah 11:1`. “**And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of
Jesse and a branch shall grow out of his roots.”**   The Lord will grow up in this town, and be
nurtured here by two wonderful chosen people; Mary and Joseph.  The four parents of these two men
are the greatest people of their generation, and we often underestimate their spiritual “giant”
status, for their service was humble and hidden.  They served in their homes and they served well,
and they brought up in godliness and holiness the herald and the King of kings.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:27
    :bold:

Here we see Gabriel again, one of the two named elect angels, being sent to Mary. In `Luke 1:19` we
see him bringing good news to Zechariah. Here we see him telling Mary of the forthcoming birth of
the Lord Jesus Christ. The word Parthenos in the Greek means a virgin, and whilst the Hebrew
equivalent in `Isaiah 7:14`, can be rendered young woman as well as virgin this is not the case in
the Greek. Mary was a virgin – and the virgin birth is crucial for redemptive history.  Jesus must
be born without any agency of man, and must be born as Adam was made, without sin.  If there is any
contamination by a man, he inherits man’s sin form Adam and cannot be the sin bearer.  `Genesis
3:17-24`.

The word for espoused is the perfect passive participle, which showed that Mary had received
engagement to Joseph in the past. The perfect tense indicated a state to be perpetuated. Betrothal
or engagement normally lasted one year and unfaithfulness on the part of the bride to be, as well as
her lover, was punished by death.  `Deuteronomy 22:23:24`.  The family line is given, as descending
directly from David.  This is the royal line of kings of Judah, but now living in very humble
circumstances, and since the days of Zerubbabel, never claiming the kingship.  `Ezra 1`-2.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:28
    :bold:

In this verse the angel comes in to talk to Mary and said, “Hail, highly favoured” [ the words “thou
that art” are not found in the original]. The word translated “highly favoured” is in the Perfect
Passive Participle, which shows that she has been given grace or enriched with grace. A similar
concept is given in `Ephesians 1:6`.

The older manuscripts do not have “blessed art thou among women” at this point, but have the phrase
in verse 42**.  **She has heard the words that every Jewish woman of the line of David had prayed to
hear for over 500 years, that she would bring the King to rule in David’s place into the world.  We
often under-estimate the status of Mary today.  We rightly condemn the acceptance of the late 19th
century visions of the French peasant girls at Fatima, who bring in the now papal doctrine of Mary
as “Mother of God”, and raise her to “queen of heaven”, for these are old pagan notions that go back
to Babylonian religion, and have no place in biblical Christianity.  `Jude 3`.

Having said that, we ignore this godly and holy woman to our peril, for she is the greatest mentor
for woman ever to live upon the earth.  She is certified as the greatest and most blessed of all
women of history and we need to acknowledge her as such.  We do not err in this and go too far
however, but practice the apostolic faith.  John the last of the apostles will be given care for
Mary by the Lord, and will care for her in his own household from that day forward.  Mary will serve
in the church at Jerusalem and tradition records as  a women in her late eighties she made the long
boat trip to Ephesus to work with John there until her death.  Her grave is at Ephesus and is
honoured by Moslem and Christian alike.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:29
    :bold:

Here Mary sees Gabriel for the first time. She has heard him in verse 28 but on seeing him she was
troubled. The word troubled is in the aorist passive indicative, she received a troubled mind at the
point of seeing the angel.  This is real revelation and it is not soft and fluffy, it is serious and
awesome!  Today we have fake prophets and others seeing “angels” and they crow about it, and say how
lovely it was, but that is the clue that they haven’t seen any angel form the Lord.  Angelic
visitation is serious and awesome!  Godly people are exhausted by such things.  `Daniel 8:27,
10:16-19`.

The phrase “cast her mind” indicates that her mind was in overdrive, being both puzzled and upset by
what the angel telling her, and what the permanent effect of what he was saying would be on her
life.  Mary is searching through her store of bible doctrine and her life experience to date, and
she is overwhelmed by the revelation she receives.  She asks herself, “What does this mean to my
life?”   She knows that her life will never be the same again.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:30
    :bold:

Gabriel tells Mary not to fear. `1 John 4:17-21`.  The verb is in the imperative mood. It is an
order. It is in the present tense which means that she is ordered to constantly not fear and the
middle voice reflects that she is going to benefit from not fearing. Mary needed encouragement, as
it was not everyday that a young girl would have a conversation with an angel.  She is rightly in
fear initially, as she knows the seriousness of an angelic visitation.

The word “favour” is the word “grace” and is a common Old Testament concept. “Charis” is a very
ancient and common word with a variety of applied meanings. They come from the concepts of
sweetness, charm, joy, blessing and delight; it indicated that the Lord delighted in the character
and behaviour of this person.   This is the Lord’s approval of one who has walked in spirituality
and is a fragrant offering daily to the glory of the Lord.  `2 Corinthians 2:14-16, Philippians
4:18-19`.

New Testament examples include, words of grace, `Luke 4:22`, Growing in grace, `Ephesians 4:29`,
living with Grace, `Colossians 4:6`.   It is also a favourite word for Christianity with such
phrases as the “Gospel of Grace”. `Acts 20:24`. Mary is said to find favour/grace with God. The word
“with” is the Greek word “para” which could be translated “in the sight of God”, and indicates a
holy and devoted life that has brought joy to the Lord.  This is a spiritual young woman, and she is
young, possibly as young as fourteen years of age.  `Isaiah 41:9-14, 43:1-7, 44:2`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:31
    :bold:

The phrase “conceive in the womb” has the same idiom in `Isaiah 7:14` of Immanuel. We talk about the
virgin birth but more properly we should call it the virgin conception.    It is a unique event in
history – occurring just this once, in order for the Messiah/Saviour to be born as Adam was created,
without any sin at all polluting him.

In this verse also we have instruction from Gabriel as to the naming of the child. In this case the
son is to be called Jesus, which is the Greek form of Joshua, and means Saviour.  It is now clear to
Mary that she is to bear the Messiah of Israel and the Saviour of mankind from Sin.  She is the
chosen vessel for God’s purposes.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:32
    :bold:

In the phrase “the Son of the Most High”, there is no article in the Greek, but the use of the Most
High in verse 35 clearly shows that it refers to God. Here Mary is told that the son who will be
born is the Messiah, for He is both God and the son of David, and that God the Father will give to
Him the throne of David which has been vacant since the curse upon the line of Coniah (Joseph’s
line) almost 600 years before.  `2 Chronicles 36:9-21, Jeremiah 22:28-30`.

The virgin birth of Christ allowed Him to reign as a king forever, as he was legally the King of the
Jews from his father Joseph, but was also in the line of David physically through his mother Mary,
and so as a son of Nathan, rather than Solomon, he escaped the curse upon Solomon and Jeconiah. `1
Kings 11:1-13`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:33
    :bold:

Gabriel now tells Mary that he will reign over the house of Jacob forever. This relates back to
Jacob’s prophecy regarding Judah in `Genesis 49:10`, and also to the promise to David in `2 Samuel
7:8-29`. The kingdom which will start at the Second Advent of Christ will last for a thousand years,
and will be called the Millennial Kingdom, and will then continue endlessly into eternity future.
`Revelation 20`-22.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:34
    :bold:

Mary understood now that she was going to be the means by which the Saviour was going to enter into
the world, but could not understand the means by which this was to be accomplished.   She recognizes
that there is something unique and very special about the conception and birth process she is about
to go through and is baffled.  She seeks clarification, not evidence.  She stands with her ancestor
Abraham and believes!  `Genesis 15:6, 18:14`.

She asked Gabriel how this could happen since she had not had sexual relations with her fiancée. It
is noted that the word man can be translated not only man but husband, and to all intents and
purposes as she was espoused to Joseph and he was “her husband”.  Mary is not ignorant of sexual
relationship being required for normal birth, but recognizes that what she is being told here is
anything but “normal”.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:35
    :bold:

The Holy Ghost is the Holy Spirit. The Greek word used here is “Pneuma” which means spirit and thus
we are talking about the third person in the Trinity.

The phrase “shall overshadow thee” is a picture of a cloud coming over her, which was a common
concept in ancient Greek for the spirit of God coming upon people and transforming them. We see this
with the accusative in `Acts 5:15` where Peter’s shadow was cast over some of the sick in the
vicinity of the Temple.

We also have the shining bright cloud of the Mount of Transfiguration in `Matthew 17:5, Mark 9:7`
and `Luke 9:34`, and the appearance of the Shekinah Glory which represented God’s presence in Old
Testament times.   `Exodus 40:38`.   It is also the phrase that we find in `Genesis 1:2` with the
Holy Spirit as the agent of creation, moving with creative power upon the earth and oceans.  The
miraculous conception or virgin birth of Jesus Christ is therefore plainly indicated in Luke who
seeing he was a physician gives added interest to his account, for he speaks here as one that knows
that this was not any ordinary birth.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:36
    :bold:

The word cousin is the Greek word suggenis, which is simply a relative rather than necessarily a
first cousin as we know it.   It should be remembered that even though Mary was a relative of
Elisabeth the latter had hidden herself away from public view [`Luke 1:24`], so the angel gave the
surprising news that not only Mary, as a virgin, was to have a child but also Elisabeth who was old
and barren was already pregnant.  The angel tells Mary who then can be encouraged by her relative,
who is also part of the plan at this point.   They have been woven together in the plan of God by
grace, through their faith, and so they will encourage one another.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:37
    :bold:

These two amazing parallel miraculous events showed clearly that with God nothing is impossible. If
He wishes to do something miraculous to further His plan He is more than able to do it and can be
depended upon to achieve his purposes through obedient people.  `Genesis 18:14, Numbers 11:23-25,
Jeremiah 32:17, 27, Zechariah 8:6-13`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:38
    :bold:

While Mary was staggered by these great pronouncements, she, unlike Zechariah, accepted them as from
God. She recognised that the great honour bestowed on her as the means of bringing the Saviour into
the world demanded nothing less that her complete obedience.

Here she uses the Greek word for a female slave of the lowest order “doule”, one who was bound to
her master for the term of her life. In this she showed complete obedience.  She seeks the power of
God to achieve the will of God, through the Plan of God.  She desires nothing other than God’s
purposes being worked out through her.  `Matthew 26:39, John 17:4-5, 18:37`.

Application
...........

Each of us have different roles to play in the Plan of God. We are given different spiritual gifts
in order to undertake our unique service for the Lord, and while of course it will not be as
spectacular as others, our service for the Lord is important.

We see with God nothing is impossible. We need to remember this when we are faced with apparently
insoluble problems.  It is the path that Mary mentors that is the path for us all – that is the path
of acceptance of the divine plan and embracing the power that the Holy Spirit provides within to
walk it properly.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/HOLY SPIRIT:  MINISTRY TO JESUS CHRIST`

Mary's Visit To Elizabeth
-------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:39-56
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:39
    :bold:

In this verse we see Mary taking action.  Any time an angel appears there is something to record, or
something to do; they demand action to express in dynamic faith the things revealed.  `James
2:14-26`.  Mary arises and enthusiastically goes to see her relative Elizabeth, who has gone into
seclusion after learning of her pregnancy.   She goes to encourage Elizabeth and pass on the message
of the angel to her, as she now knows that Elizabeth has also received a message.

“Into the hill country”. Luke uses this adjective twice in this context, both here and in `Luke
1:65`, instead of “to oros”, the mountains. It occurs nowhere else in the New Testament.  We do not
know in what village Elisabeth and Zechariah lived. As a priest he probably lived in a Levitical
city in Judea when he was not operating in the Temple, and from Luke’s description it may have been
a humble one.

Luke is very fond of the word “Anistemi” meaning “to arise”, using it sixty times, compared to a
mere twenty-two other occurrences in the rest of the New Testament.  He sees the importance of
“dynamic faith”, a faith that is expressed in getting up and getting moving forwards.  It is a very
doctor’s word, as a lot of the time in clinic you will be encouraging people to get up and get
moving, especially to get rid of depression.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:40
    :bold:

Having traveled perhaps quite a distance Mary arrived at the house of Zechariah, and warmly embraced
Elisabeth. This was a unique meeting for two pregnant women who both had miraculous conceptions.
There was great empathy towards each other being aware that they were privileged to be intimately
involved in the greatest event in history.  These woman have much to share and pray over together,
and it is this prayer time together that is important here.  There is a veil drawn over their time
together and we know Luke must have been told much more by Mary when he spoke with her, but he is
not led to share it.  The full story of these two amazing women will be told in heaven and it will
be amazing to hear there.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:41
    :bold:

The leaping of a child in the womb is a common enough incident with unborn children, as seen in
`Genesis 25:22`, and as experienced by many women, but here Elisabeth was filled with the Holy
Spirit to understand what had happened to Mary.  There is a natural phenomena but a supernatural
explanation and a wonderful hymn is born as a result.

The effect of the arrival of Mary on Elisabeth is very dynamic. This verse says “Elisabeth was
filled with the Holy Ghost”. The meaning of this seems to be that she was filled with joy and
prophetic utterance; with a desire to praise God, a prophetic spirit, and a knowledge of the
character of the child that should be born of her. All these were produced by the Holy Spirit.

It should also be noted that the Holy Ghost is the Holy Spirit. With the translation of the King
James Version the fellows from the three universities involved translated the Greek word ‘Pneuma” as
Ghost or Spirit depending on their personal preference. The correct translation is Spirit.
Misunderstanding of this has caused some to believe that there is a fourth character in the plan of
God and the Holy Ghost and the Holy Spirit are not the same.  We thank these men for their mazing
translation in 1611, but we are rightly annoyed at them for expressing personal preferences rather
than sticking to the text alone.  It is a reminder to be more like Mary and Elizabeth than be like
the Elizabethan and Jacobean divines who did the translating work!

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:42
    :bold:

Elisabeth enthusiastically shouted out the fact that Mary was greatly blessed/honoured, being the
vehicle by which God would bring the Saviour into the world.    Elisabeth here repeated nearly word
perfect, the very words of the angel to Mary in `Luke 1:28`, esteeming it to be the highest honour
among mothers to be the mother of the Messiah.  `Genesis 22:18, Psalm 21:6-7, 45:1-2, 72:17-19`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:43
    :bold:

Elisabeth is almost incredulous as to the great honour the Lord has given her that the mother of the
humanity of her Saviour should have come to visit her at her home.  The fact that Elisabeth
recognises that Mary is bearing the Messiah is another feature of her being controlled by the Holy
Spirit.  Both these women are amazing mentors of truth to us, for they have taken the words of the
angel seriously and have prepared their hearts to receive the fullness of the Lord’s bounty, and all
that will flow from it.  Both these women will have joy and also great pain in the role of their
sons.  `Psalm 110:1, John 13:13-17, 20:28-31, Philippians 3:8-11`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:44
    :bold:

The effect of the arrival of Mary is instantaneous. With the sound of Mary’s voice the embryonic
John the Baptist leapt in Elisabeth’s womb.  There are often sudden movements of babies around the
six to seven month point.  They are often moving, but Elizabeth records that it is as if John leaps
for joy in her womb.  She feels the joy.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:45
    :bold:

This is the first beatitude in the New Testament, and it is similar to the last one in the Gospels
spoken to Thomas to discourage his doubt [`John 20:29`].  This is a prophetic utterance and
Elizabeth manifests the gifting of prophetess under the Holy Spirit’s direction here.  `Luke 2:36,
Acts 21:9`.  Let none despise the work of Women under the Holy Spirit’s guidance and power.

Elisabeth wishes Mary to have full faith in the prophecy of the angel, and embrace, as she has the
destiny that the Lord has appointed them to fulfill.  This song of Elisabeth is as real poetry as is
that of Mary in verses 47-55, which is known as the Magnificat, and that of Zacharias in verses
68-70.

All three spoke under the power of the Holy Spirit. These are the first New Testament hymns and they
are very beautiful. Luke has received all these directly from the recollections of Mary herself, and
so we can be sure that these were sung as hymns in the early church, and as reminders of grace in
action.

**Verses 46 – 55 - MARY’S “MAGNIFICAT”**

This song properly consists of three parts.

**Stanza A** - In the first part Mary praises God for what He had done for herself personally
[Verses 46-49]

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:46-49
    :bold:

**“My soul doth magnify the Lord”** - The Greek verb “megaluno” means to celebrate with words, to
extol with praises. This is the only way in which God can be magnified, or made great by us as men;
for, strictly speaking, nothing can be added to God, for he is infinite and eternal.  Worship
remains the only way to give glory to the Lord, the only way to magnify his holy name is to show
forth and celebrate those acts through which he has manifested his greatness.

**“My spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour ”** – Mary’s spirit was lifted up as all grace filled
believers are lifted up in their worship. These words show that Mary’s whole soul was filled with
the Divine influence, and focused entirely on God. It also shows that Mary recognised she was a
sinner and needed a Saviour. [The sinless status of Mary within the Roman Catholic Church Doctrine
is a very recent thing – coming from visions received by French peasant girls in the early 1900s and
recognized by the Pope later that century.]   Mary will be the most embarrassed person in heaven due
to the false things said of her upon the earth by some – but do not miss the truth in the midst of
the nonsense – she is the greatest ever woman of history.

**“He hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden” **– He has looked favourably upon me.  Mary is
saying that in the most tender and compassionate manner God has visited her in her humble status,
for she sees herself as the lowest of female slaves, drawing the reasons of his conduct, not from
any excellence in her, but from his own eternal kindness and love.  Mary recognizes grace and mercy
in God’s actions, and she does not credit to herself anything other than gratitude and joy.

**“All generations shall call me blessed”** - This was the character by which Mary alone wished to
be known. What dishonour do those do to this holy woman, who give her names and characters which her
pure soul would abhor; and which properly belong to God her Saviour!  By many Mary is addressed as
Queen of Heaven, Mother of God, titles which are both non biblical and blasphemous, and detract from
the great example that Mary is to all women and men.

**“He that is mighty hath done to me great things”.   **As God fills Mary with His goodness, she
empties herself to Him in praises; and, sinking into her own nothingness, she ever confesses that
God alone is all in all.  `Psalm 71:19, 126:2-3, 150:1-6`.

**“Holy is his name”** - Probably the word which Mary used was “chesed”, which though we sometimes
translate as “holy”, yet the proper meaning is abundant goodness, exuberant kindness; and this well
agrees with the next verse of her song.What a great example of a Hallelujah Chorus this is – this
woman mentors worship for us all.

**Stanza B.**  In the second stanza, Mary praises GOD for what He has done, and would do, for her as
an obedient believer [Verses 51-53].  True worship begins by praising God for who He is, and then
moves to what He has done, and is doing and will do for us as his children.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:50-53
    :bold:

**“His mercy is on them”** – His  favour or grace in action is shown on those who recognize their
true state before hIm as guilty of sin, and his mercy is demonstrated to them in grace, mercy and
love.

**“That fear him”** – Relates to those that “reverence” or honour Him. One kind of fear is godly
fear, and that is that which a servant has towards a loving master, who the servant does not want to
upset.  They fear to offend and upset their loving master.  The other fear, the servile or shrinking
fear which a man has of a precipice, the plague, or of death is not this fear that is mentioned
here. There is no cringing and upsetting “fear” toward God, for in Christ Jesus he is our heavenly
Father.  `1 John 4:7-21`.

The reverential fear is one which an obedient child has towards a kind and virtuous father, a fear
of injuring his feelings; of dishonouring the family name by our life; or of doing anything which he
would disapprove. It is on those who have such fear of God that his mercy descends. This is this
godly and holy “fear of the Lord” which is the beginning of wisdom, `Job 28:28, Psalm 111:10,
Proverbs 3:1-10`.

**“From generation to generation” **- From one age to another, it is unceasing; it continues and
abounds. But it means also more than this. It means that God’s mercy will descend on the children
and children’s children of those that fear him and keep his commandments.  There is
multigenerational blessing for all who keep the Lord’s Words.  Whole family networks are blessed by
fellowship with and obedience to the Lord.

In verses 51 to 54 we have six aorist active indicative verbs the explaining what God has done. All
are translated “hath”-

Hath shewed strength with his arm.

Hath scattered the proud

Hath put down the mighty from their seats.

Hath filled the hungry with good things.

Hath sent the rich empty away.

Hath holpen [helped] his servant Israel.

Verse 51 - **“He hath showed strength with his arm”. **God has almighty power. In the incarnation
and in working out salvation for his people; which is done by his own arm, he was mighty to save,
and demonstrated the greatness of his strength.  God’s arm is never “shortened” that is cannot
exercise power and save us in all things.  `Isaiah 50:2, 59:1`.

**“He hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts”. ** This relates to the proud and
haughty Jewish leaders; who imagined nothing less, than that the Messiah would be born of one of the
rich and noble families in Judea. They believed that he would appear as a prince, and set up an
earthly kingdom in great state and splendour, and make them a free and flourishing people.  They
could not conceive of the Messiah being humble, for they were arrogant.

Instead of this, he was born of a poor virgin, of whom they sarcastically remarked,  “Is not his
mother called Mary, who was of Nazareth in Galilee?” In addition they asked, “Shall Christ come out
of Galilee? Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?”   they had an expectation of things that was
wrong, but they were confident in their arrogance, as all proud people are.  God does not exult the
arrogant, for they are too busy exulting themselves!  `1 Peter 5:5-10`.

Here however we have a virgin engaged to a carpenter, living in a despised town, giving birth to the
Messiah, and because of the lowliness of his birth the Messiah was rejected by them; and thus were
they scattered and confounded in all their imaginations.  They imagined vain things!  They would
reap the consequences of their evil thoughts.  `Psalm 2:1-12, 108:12, 127:1-2`.

**Verse 52** – **“He hath put down the mighty from their seats”. ** God has removed powerful leaders
from their positions of authority from time to time and will do so in the future, as well as proud
fallen angels, who will be cast out of heaven half way through the Tribulation period, to be later
cast down to hell and the Lake of Fire.  Eventually the Lord will set up His own kingdom as the
commencement of His eternal rulership as King of Kings.  Nothing will stop the victory of the Lord
and the establishment of his kingdom.

**“And exalted them of low degree”. ** The house and family of David, which had not had one seated
on the throne for over 600 years, had socially sunk very low.   God would sue the last of the godly
line, Mary, only in the eyes of the world a poor virgin, but she was in David’s family.  She would
be the means of bringing the Saviour into the world, thus exalting them from what the world saw as
“low degree”.  This methodology has been used by God, in his infinite wisdom, and in his grace in
all ages of time. “Not many mighty and noble”, (`1 Corinthians 1:26`) are called by grace; but
usually the foolish, the weak, and the base things of the world.  God delights in lifting up!

**Verse 53 - “He hath filled the hungry with good things”** we find characters such as Simeon and
Anna who were eagerly awaiting the Messiah who we will see later in this chapter being granted a
meeting with the young Messiah. These did not lust after material things of this world but were
satisfied with joy and peace, with food and gladness, so that they could say with Jacob, they have
enough, yes, all things; seeing Christ is theirs, and all things with him.

**“And the rich he hath sent empty away”** - the rich in this world's goods, and such who trust in
their wealth, and boast of their riches will always be judged eventually – for they cling to things
that do not last.  `Matthew 6:19-20`.    God sometimes strips them of all, and turns them into the
world naked and empty.   `James 5:1-6`.   However we see the rich in grace, who are often the
materially poor of the world, and who, though they seem to have nothing, yet possess all things, and
are full. `Matthew 5:3-16`.

**Stanza C** - In the third stanza, she praises Him for what He had done, and would do, for the
nation Israel [ Verses 54-56].

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:54-55
    :bold:

Every idea here occurs in the Old Testament, showing that Mary’s mind was full of the spiritual
message of God’s word.

**Verse 54 **– **“He hath holpen his servant Israel”. ** By application this means not the natural
descendants of Jacob, or Israel in general, but the elect of God among them – the believing remnant
that truly reflected Abrahamic faith. The Scriptures make it clear that all were not Israel, who
were of Israel; and not them only, but also the chosen ones among the Gentiles; who, with the
former, are all descendants of Abraham.  `Isaiah 1:9, 10:20-22, Jeremiah 44:12`ff, `Ezekiel 6:8,
Romans 4:16`.  The word “servant” can be translated as “a child” as well as “a servant” and refers
to the weak and helpless but with the understanding of relationship.

**“in remembrance of his mercy”. **This refers to God attitude, which he had in his heart towards
them. The mercy of God is the source of each man’s redemption. Mercy provided a Redeemer, and a
ransom; and it is owing to it, that the Redeemer came, not to works of righteousness done by men,
but to the abundant mercy of God our Saviour. `Ephesians 2:1-10`.

**Verse 55 **– **“As he spake to our fathers”. ** God had communicated specifically and individually
to many of Mary’s ancestors; to David, of whose family Mary was, to Jacob, or Israel, and to Isaac.

**“To Abraham and to his seed for ever”.** Again let us refer back to `Romans 4:16`, where the
forever seed of Abraham is not his natural, but his spiritual seed; both among Jews and Gentiles, to
the end of the ages of this world. To these God promised this mercy of a Saviour and Redeemer, and
these he helps and will keep on helping us, to all generations until this world ends.  `Matthew
28:18-20, 2 Peter 3:10-18`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:56
    :bold:

**“And Mary abode with her about three months” **- Mary stayed with Elisabeth about three months.
This space of three months is a term of time fixed by the Jewish doctors, to know whether a woman is
pregnant or not.  It was also just long enough to be there to help Elizabeth with her birth, and see
the baby John safely born and healthy.

This is important as in case of divorce or death: the Mishnah rules state, "every woman that is
divorced, or becomes a widow, lo! she may not marry, nor be betrothed, until she waits, ninety days
(i.e. three months), exclusive of the day in which she is divorced, or her husband dies, and of the
day in which she is betrothed; that so it may be known whether she is with child or not, in order to
distinguish between the seed of the former, and the seed of the second husband. And so in the case
of marrying the wife of a brother, that died without issue, and of newly married couples mistaking
their spouses”.

**“And returned to her own house”;** at Nazareth, in the Galilee; and so now it was, that Joseph, to
whom she was engaged, saw that she was pregnant, and suspecting infidelity had a mind to divorce her
privately.  However being informed by an angel of God, in a dream, of how Mary had become pregnant
he was encouraged to take her as his wife, which he accordingly did.   See `Matthew 1:18 -23`.
Imagine that journey back home having left a young girl, and returning a pregnant woman, to what
sort of welcome.  Mary had to trust the Lord here, and depend upon the Lord to give Joseph the same
sort of visitation that she had received.

Application
...........

We should be keen about our work for the Lord and eagerly participate in His plan for our lives. We
should encourage other believers as we are able.

When we are doing the work of God we should realise that it involves not just us as individuals, but
we are all members of the same body, and our contributions should be coordinated.   The coordination
is that of the Holy Spirit, and each of us needs to listen to the Spirit and do what the Spirit
guides us to do, and that will always be to encourage others in the work of God.  This will
stimulate those involved for further work for the Lord.

We often receive blessings from God. We do not earn or deserve these blessings but we receive them
with joy and often surprise.

We should recognise Mary as the mother of the humanity of Jesus Christ, and as the greatest of all
women, and a worthy mentor for us all.

The reverential fear of the Lord is the beginning of all godly wisdom. For those who trust Him there
is protection and comfort, but for those who arrogantly reject Him He sends discipline. “Vengeance
is mine, I will repay saith the Lord”.  `Hebrews 10:30-31, 12:25-29`.

It is an unspeakable privilege to be descended from believing parents; to have been the subject of
their prayers, and to have received their blessing. It is also a matter of vast guilt not to copy
their example and to walk in their steps.

If God is “disposed” to show mercy to thousands of generations, how heavy will be the condemnation
if the children of saintly parents do not obtain for themselves of it and early seek his
forgiveness?

God does protect and provide for his own, but judges and opposes the haughty and proud.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/MARY`

Birth Of John The Baptist
-------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:57-58
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................













Application
...........

The Lord often uses people who are naturally retiring, those who may be old as the world measures
age, and perhaps not as attractive as they once had been in the bloom of youth, to accomplish great
things for Him in His plan.

We are told to rejoice with those who rejoice. Here we see all the relations and neighbours
rejoicing on the birth of John the Baptist.  `Romans 12:15, Philippians 3:1-3, 4:4`.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/JOHN THE BAPTIST`

Circumcision And Naming Of John
-------------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:59-80
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:59-61
    :bold:

**“And it came to pass that on the eighth day”** - The precise time for circumcision is fixed in
`Genesis 17:12` **“And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every man child in
your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which
****is**** not of thy seed.**

**“They came to circumcise the child”**; that is, the neighbours and cousins of Elisabeth, who were
there at the time of her delivery.  Eight days after the birth they all came again to be at the
circumcision of the child. There was no particular person appointed to do the circumcision, for the
rule stated, "all are fit to circumcise; even an uncircumcised person, and a woman, and a minor, may
circumcise in a place where there is no man; but a Gentile may not circumcise at all”.

The circumcision of John seems to be performed in Zechariah's house, and by one of those that came,
for Zechariah, being dumb, could not say the blessing which the circumciser was obliged to say.
Neither could he say that which, as the father of the child, was his responsibility.  `Numbers
6:24-26`.  The same blessing that he was unable to say from the steps of the temple the day he saw
the angel.

**“and they called him Zechariah, after the name of his father”:** as the neighbours of Naomi gave a
name to the son of Boaz and Ruth, calling him Obed, `Ruth 4:17`.  This they did because Zechariah
was dumb, taking charge, as the traditions gave them the right to, if a father was dumb, as it was
seen as a judgment and so others took his role and exercised it on his behalf.

The naming of John would cause a problem in the community for Zechariah and Elisabeth, because the
locals had called the baby Zechariah, after the father but Elisabeth counters this naming by saying
that the baby’s name shall be John. According to the Jewish custom of the day you named a baby after
a relative whether alive or dead, unlike the modern custom among the Jews which requires that the
relative be dead. No one in the family had ever been called John thus this was a major break in
tradition and custom.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:62-63
    :bold:

The imperfect active indicative of the word “enneuo” indicates that they constantly were making
signs to Zechariah because they could not believe the proposed naming of his son.  They appeared
dumbstruck at this change from custom, but this man John would turn accepted custom on its head!

The word have - “thelo” - is in the optative mood which is the mood of a wish so that rather than
use the word “have”, this verse could be better translated, “And they were constantly making signs
to the father how he would wish him to be called”

The fact that they were constantly making signs to Zechariah showed that he was not only dumb but
deaf as well. The people who did not approve of Elisabeth’s answer, now made representations to
Zechariah asking him what he was going to call the child. So he confirmed the name John by writing
it on a tablet.

**“and they marvelled all”**; they were astonished, not so much at the new name brought into the
family, as at the agreement between Elisabeth and Zechariah in this point.  While the vision,
appearance of the angel would be well known, the thought that Zechariah may have been under judgment
would have made them all a little hesitant, when the latter was both deaf and dumb. At this stage
they knew little or nothing of the angel’s full message.

There is a very interesting play on words here as Zechariah means “God remembers”, and Elisabeth,
“the oath of God”. In combination then we have the phrase “God remembers His oath”.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:64
    :bold:

Immediately he acted in obedience to the instructions he had been given in verse 13, and the
dumbness was removed and he began to praise God – his first act after being freed of the deafness
and inability to speak was to worship God and speak of all he had learned form the angel.

The word “loosed” is not in the original but implied by the fact that he who was dumb kept on
praising [imperfect tense] the Lord.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:65-66
    :bold:

The imperfect tense of “dialaleo” shows that this even caused constant comment in the neighbourhood.
Note that he taught them a lot more than just these things recorded here – the people heard all the
things that he had to communicate and they saw a transformed man and women, now proud parents in
their forties or fifties.

**“And fear came on all that dwelt round about them”. **The fear that we are seeing here is a
reverential fear of the Lord. They realise that the hand of God was in these things and that made a
very serious impression upon all their minds. We see a similar incident in `Acts 2:43`, “ And fear
came upon every soul: and many wonders and signs were done by the apostles.”

**“and all these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Judea”:** There are a
number of significant things that were the cause of constant comment relating to the two births, but
especially related to the appearance of the angel to Zechariah in the temple; his message to him;
the striking of Zechariah deaf and dumb; the conception of Elisabeth, who had been barren; the birth
of her son; the unusual name given him; and the more unusual manner in which it was given; and the
removal of Zechariah's deaf and dumb status.

These people treasured these events in their memories, and often thought of them wondering what
would be their eventual result. They concluded that God had a most important function for the child
to perform since so many, and such great things, have gone before and been involved in his birth.
This is also Luke’s way of telling us that he has spoken to many people about these things and
conformed the stories.

The fact that **“the hand of the Lord was with him” **indicates God preserving his life, giving him
health, causing him to grow strong both in body, mind and grace.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:67
    :bold:

When Zechariah speaks he is controlled by the Holy Spirit and gives an accurate song of praise to
the Lord drawing on multiple phrases from the Old Testament.  Called the “Benedictus” – this song
has entered Church History and worship down the centuries.

The word for filled is the Greek word “Pletho”, whereas being filled with the Holy Spirit in
`Ephesians 5:18` is the Greek word “Pleroo”. We need to realise that Zechariah, unlike believers
since Pentecost, was not permanently indwelt by the Holy Spirit. He was given the assistance of the
Holy Spirit at this point in time, as shown by the aorist tense. [See doctrines of the ministry of
the Holy Spirit below].  The filling still produced great bible teaching and worship, but he did not
enjoy the fullness of joy we have now since Pentecost.

Zechariah now prophecies before the Lord. His prophetic word can be divided into two sections;
verses 68-75 speaks of the coming Messiah, with emphasis on the Lord Jesus Christ, rather than his
son John. In the second passage verses 76 to 80 he focuses in on his son John.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:68-75
    :bold:

**Verse 68 **– He begins in the traditional Jewish way of worship, reminding all that God is to be
“blessed” aloud by all who receive his great blessings.  `Psalm 41:13, 72:17-19,106:48`. The middle
voice of the verb “episkeptomai” translated “visited” shows that Zechariah, inspired by the Holy
Spirit, knew that this was of benefit for mankind for God to visit man in these ways, through Mary
and Elizabeth. The word “visited” means to visit for the purpose of “aiding those who need aid,” or
alleviating misery. Here God “looked upon” the world - He saw it miserable - He came to relieve it,
and brought salvation.  `Exodus 3:11-14, Psalm 111:9-10`.

The phrase “and redeemed” was spoken under the belief that the Messiah, “the Redeemer,” was about to
appear, and would certainly accomplish his work.   There was no doubt that the Lord would accomplish
all he set out to do.  `Isaiah 55:6-11`. The literal translation of this passage is, “He hath made a
“ransom” for his people. Men are sinners. They are bound over to just punishment by the law.

The law is holy, and God, as a just ruler must see that the law is honoured and the wicked punished.
However if anything can be done, which will be an “equivalent” for the punishment, then God may
release the sinner.

The “blood of Jesus” - that is, his death in the place of sinners constitutes such a ransom. It is
in their stead. It is for them. It is equivalent to their punishment. It is not itself a
“punishment,” for that always supposes “personal crime,” but it is what God is pleased to accept in
the place of the eternal sufferings of the sinner.

The king of the “Locrians” made a law that an adulterer should be punished with the loss of his
eyes. His “son” was the first offender, and the father decreed that his son should lose one eye, and
he himself one also. This was the “ransom.” He showed his “love,” his regard for the honour of his
law, and the determination that the guilty should not escape.

So God gave his Son a “ransom” to show his love, his regard to justice, and his willingness to save
people; and his Son, in his death, was a ransom.  `Psalm 49:5-9, 15`.

**Verse 69** - A horn is a symbol of strength. The word salvation, connected here with the word
“horn,” means that this “strength”, or this mighty Redeemer, was going to be able to save to the
uttermost.  `Hebrews 7:25`. It is possible that this whole figure may be taken from the Jewish
“altar.” On each of the four corners of the altar there was a small projection called a “horn.” To
this persons might flee for safety when in danger, and be safe. We flee to the Lord for safety, to
be saved from our sins by His grace, and the power of his salvation meets all the needs of sinful
and repentant man.  `Psalm 18:2, 132:17, 148:14`.

**“In the house of his servant David”** can mean “in the family of his servant David. In `Luke 1:32`
the angel states that Mary was of the family of David and this is shown conclusively in the
genealogy in `Luke 3`. This statement by Zechariah is a matter of considerable importance; because
it demonstrates the truth of all the prophetic declarations, which uniformly state that the Messiah
should come from the family and sit on the throne of David. `Isaiah 9:6-7, 11:1-10, Jeremiah 23:5-8,
33:14-22, Ezekiel 34:23-28, 37:24-28`.

**Verse 70 – **“As he spake, by the mouth of his holy prophets”, shows not only the faithfulness of
God in his promises and the longevity of His promises as it has been “since the world began”. Cf
`Genesis 3:15`.   God speaks through his prophets, and for all who heard his words through these
godly men and women, there was the hope that Zechariah and Elizabeth had, and a fixed focus forward
to the culmination of the plan of salvation in the person of the Redeemer.  `Psalm 95:7-11, 1 Peter
1:10-12, 2 Peter 1:20-21`.

**Verses 71-73** - The English the word saved “soteria” in verse 71 would appear to be a verb but it
is a noun. The literal translation of the start of this verse therefore is, “Salvation out of the
enemies of us”.  The “enemies” of mankind are the legacy of the Fall in the Garden of Eden; the
curse of sin and death that stalks mankind through the centuries since that fateful day our
ancestors fell.  `Isaiah 14:1-3, 9-11, 44:18-22`.

This verse and the two following either contain and express the substance of what God spoke by the
prophets; that they should be saved by Him from their sin, from Satan, from the world, from the Law,
and from death, which was the last enemy that is to be destroyed. The second half of the verse is a
further repetition of His salvation “from our enemies”.

Both of the verbs in verse 72 are in the infinitive mood which indicates the purpose behind this
action. This verse also praises the faithfulness of the Lord that he will keep his promises.
Whatever God has said he will do will be accomplished, and it will be accomplished as he has
promised, literally and fully.  `Genesis 22:16-18, Romans 15:8-14`.

In verse 73 the faithfulness of God is further demonstrated in the fact that the verb “omnuo”,
meaning to swear, is in the aorist tense, meaning at a point of time, and that time was to Abraham
some 2000 years before this event. What an amazing God we have to make a promise 2000 years before
it was fulfilled, or at least 4000 years in the case of `Genesis 3:15`.  God is the covenant keeping
God, and every promise that is made will be fulfilled.  `Deuteronomy 7:6-13, Psalm 105:7-15`.

**Verse 74** – What is said in this and the following verse, is the result of the plan of God;
firstly that we, being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, as stated before, in verse 71,
that we might serve him without fear. Our principle responsibility, because we have been delivered
from our spiritual enemies, is the worship and service of God.

This is not the legalistic service but one based on gratitude and joy, a total lack of fear, and a
holy desire to serve the Lord because of who He is and what he has done for us. It is a saying of
the Jews that: "greater is he that serves from love, than he that serves from fear”.

However such a type of service is not natural to man, to be performed by his own power and strength,
but can only be accomplished through the power of the Holy Spirit in their lives.  `Isaiah 35:10,
35:17, 22-24, 54:13-14, Zephaniah 3:16-20`.

**Verse 75** – We are to worship in holiness and righteousness. God is not interested in ritual or
religious ceremonies but to worship in spirit, controlled by the Holy Spirit and truth, in
conformity with His Word.  `Psalm 119:30, 151, John 4:23`=24, 8:32-46, 14:6.

As the apostles Paul and Peter showed in their epistles, having been bought by the precious blood of
Christ, and redeemed by his completed and perfect work, he was a willing slave of Christ, who had
bought him from the slavery of sin. It is part of our testimony to be rightly motivated in our
service to the Lord and to others, and that motivation is gratitude and joy in the Lord’s work on
our behalf.  `Nehemiah 8:10,  2 Thessalonians 3:13-17, 1 Peter 1:18-22, 2 Peter 1:3-8`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:76-78
    :bold:

**Verse 76** – John’s task is to be the prophet of the Most High, not just His herald. He is going
before the coming Messiah. He is going to be before the face of the Messiah preparing for His Coming
ministry.   What joy fills this father’s heart as he says these words.  We can only glimpse his joy
here, for he sees in the Spirit the great task that this little baby as a man will fulfill. `Isaiah
40:1-5, Malachi 3:1, 4:5`.

**Verse 77 **-  John is going to give the gospel of the kingdom and will have a specific ministry in
relation to Baptism. He is going to give them knowledge of salvation. The King is coming and the
people have to be readied for His arrival.  To prepare for the arrival of the king, all need to be
clean before his presence, and that means clean from sin and evil practice.  `1 Corinthians 3:17,
Ephesians 1:4, 5:27, 1 Peter 1:12-16, Jude 20`.

**Verse 78**  - The dayspring is the same as the daystar or morning star. The morning star announces
the start of a new day, the coming of light. John is announcing the coming of the Light of the World
in the form of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of Righteousness of the book of Malachi.  `Numbers
24:17, Isaiah 11:1-5, Zechariah 3:8, 6:12-13, Malachi 4:2`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 1:79-80
    :bold:

**Verse 79 ** -The word “epiphanio” translated “to give light”, is in the infinitive mood, which
shows the purpose of the Lord Jesus Christ coming was to give light and therefore life to those
under the shadow of death and requiring God’s direct guidance and deliverance.

Here we have the twofold ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ. We should note the difference between
“them” that sit in darkness, and guidance of “our” feet. Those who sit in darkness are the pagan
Gentiles, while those who need guidance are the Jews.  Both groups will benefit from the completed
work of the Lord Jesus.  `Psalm 25:7-12, 85:10-13, Proverbs 3:1-8, 13-19, 8:22-31`.

**Verse 80** - In this, the last verse of this chapter, the child “constantly grew”, but also
constantly “received strength in spirit”, showing that the Lord was preparing John the Baptist for
his ministry as the herald of the Lord Jesus Christ.

At some age he leaves home and spends most of the rest of his life in the desert places in the
wilderness of Judea. This separates him from the corrupt organized religion of the days after his
father’s ministry, and contrasts his message with theirs. He is a voice crying in the wilderness,
“Prepare ye the way of the Lord”.  He sets the stage for the Lord’s ministry, as the herald of the
King, and the prophet of the Lord announcing that the words of all the previous prophets are about
to be fulfilled in the coming of the promised King and Saviour.  `Isaiah 57:13-21`.

Application
...........

Some things appear foolish to people who relate wholly on human wisdom or tradition. Our ways are
not His ways, nor our thoughts His thoughts.  `Isaiah 55:6-11`.

The Lord loves an obedient child. Obedience to the Lord can bring great blessing to the individual
and the family. The Lord wants obedience and a pure joyful heart, not offerings given without love
and joy.

We are permanently indwelt by the Holy Spirit, though not always controlled by Him. In the pre
Pentecost days the Holy Spirit was given for a period of time to undertake certain divine duties and
could be taken away as part of discipline. This is what David was fearful of in `Psalm 51:11`.

The men, by whom God spoke of the Messiah, were men with a spirit of prophecy; who spoke as they
were moved by God with one "mouth"; all agreeing in their accounts concerning Christ, though they
lived in different periods of time, from the beginning of time.

It is our duty to act as ambassadors for the Lord while He is away. We in a sense are also heralds
for the coming King, whose return is expected for his church at any time now.  `1 Corinthians 11:26,
2 Corinthians 5:17-21`.

We never retire from the Christian life. We are on duty until the day we die.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/CIRCUMCISION`
- :doc:`doctrines/HOLY SPIRIT:  MINISTRY IN THE OLD TESTAMENT`
- :doc:`doctrines/HOLY SPIRIT:  MINISTRY TO JESUS CHRIST [see page 25]`
- :doc:`doctrines/HOLY SPIRIT:  MINISTRY IN THE NEW TESTAMENT`

