Chapter 4
=========

The Temptation Of Jesus
-----------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:1-13
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:1
    :bold:

“Full of the Holy Spirit" - the difference of the Persons in the Trinity is shown here, but with
evident unity.  One recalls also Luke’s account of the overshadowing of Mary by the Holy Spirit in
`Luke 1:35`.  The word translated full is “pros” which means face to face, or in close company with
the Holy Spirit.

“Was led by the Spirit” is in the imperfect passive, which means He was continuously led in this
way. Thus Luke affirms that Jesus was now continuously under the guidance of the Holy Spirit. Hence
in this same sentence he mentions the Spirit twice.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:2
    :bold:

“Being tempted” (peirazomenos). Present passive participle and naturally parallel with the imperfect
passive of the verb meaning to be led in verse 1. The devil challenged the Son of Man though also he
is challenging the Son of God. It was a contest between Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, and the
slanderer of men. The devil had won with Adam and Eve. He has hopes of triumph over Jesus, but they
are false hopes.

“He did eat nothing”.  While Mark does not mention the fast, Matthew has the aorist active
participle of Nesteuo, which usually means a religious fast for purposes of devotion. That idea is
not excluded by Luke’s words, and may refer to a fast of between 0600 – 1800 each day, but still
eating each evening.  The enemy picks the optimum time to attack in the day when hunger is at its
peak.

The commencement of the Lord Jesus Christ upon his Messianic ministry was a fit time for this solemn
and intense period of devotion to His father as well as the temptations.  This mental and spiritual
strain would not naturally take away the appetite, and there was probably nothing at hand to eat.
The weakness from the absence of food gave the devil his special opportunity to tempt the humanity
of Jesus which he promptly seized.

According to Luke the verb for hunger is in the aorist active indicative showing that the hunger
came at the close of the forty fasting days as in `Matthew 4:2`.  Refer to the Harmony passages at
this point.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:3-4
    :bold:

Luke also uses the first class condition. “If you are the Son of God and you are”.  The enemy
recognizes truth and hates it, and his demons tremble at it.  `James 2:19`. He recognises Jesus
Christ as the Son of God as he was originally the personal servant of the Lord as the covering
Cherub.

Perhaps pointing to a particular round stone that looked in shape and size like a loaf of bread
Satan now tempts Jesus to turn it into bread.   Stanley in his book Sinai and Palestine, p. 154,
shows that on Mt. Carmel are found crystallizations of stones called “Elijah’s melons.”  The hunger
of Jesus opened the way for the diabolic suggestion designed to inspire doubt in Jesus toward his
Father. The word for bread, artos, is probably better translated “loaf.”

The Lord's rebuttal of the temptation is discussed in the evaluation of the Matthew account above.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:5
    :bold:

Only in Luke is the word “stigme” used, and then nowhere else in the New Testament. What it means in
an instant of time or a “second of time”.  This panorama of all the kingdoms of the world and the
glory of them in a moment of time was a great feat of satanic performance.   Jesus saw all the
glamour of the kingdoms of men, and they were at that time Satan’s to give the Lord, and I suspect
they still are.

This second temptation in Luke is the third in Matthew’s order.  Luke’s order is geographical
(wilderness, mountain, Jerusalem). Matthew’s is climacteric (hunger, nervous dread, ambition). There
is a climax in Luke’s order also (sense, man, God).   Remember to keep the entire harmony together
to get the full perspective – each Gospel writer is emphasizing one or other aspect of things, and
they must all be put together.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:6
    :bold:

The word for power is exousia, which means ruling authority. Satan is offering the Lord Jesus Christ
authority over the earth, and it is his to give, as he became the ruler of the world through the
deceitfulness of man’s sinfulness, from the fall of Adam onwards.

“For it hath been delivered unto me” is in the perfect passive indicative. Satan here claims
possession of world power, with lasting results, and Jesus does not deny it.  It is true that he has
power, but it is not permanent, it is temporary, but has been dominant till this point due to man’s
sin and by God’s permission. Jesus calls Satan the “ruler of this world” in  `John 12:31, 14:30,
16:11`.  All is about to change however and the Lord does not give Satan advance warning of this at
this point.

This claim of Satan, makes us, even now, consider whether some of the world rulers are not,
consciously or unconsciously, agents of the devil.   From many decisions made through history we can
conclude that many have been his servants, but their dominance is temporary. The tone of Satan here
is one of superiority to Jesus in world power, and on the surface at leats it appears that Satan is
“winning” – the truth is however altogether different.  He offers him a share in it on one
condition.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:7
    :bold:

That is what it really comes down to in the dirty world of satanic power politics. Here we have the
Greek word “Proskuneo”, which means to Worship. It is in the aorist active subjunctive. Satan says,
“just bow the knee once [aorist tense] here in my presence” and the deal is done.

The temptation was for Jesus to admit Satan’s authority by this act of prostration (fall down and
worship), a recognition of his authority rather than of any personal merit.  The Lord will never
acknowledge Satan as having anything other than usurped authority form mankind through sin, and he
is determined to break that hold by the work of the Cross.

“All shall be thine” - Satan offers to turn over all the keys of world power to Jesus, but of course
it is as a “tetrarch”, under Satan’s power, as Herod is under Caesars power.  It was a tremendous
play, but Jesus saw at once that in that case he would be the agent of Satan in the rule of the
world by bargain and graft, instead of ruling as the Son of God, by nature and battlefield victory
over sin and death, and finally world ruler by conquest over Satan.  `Revelation 19:1-20:15`. The
heart of Satan’s program is here laid bare and his deception is rebuked.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:8
    :bold:

Satan has spoken to Jesus Christ regarding worshipping him, but Jesus now turns it against Satan by
the quotation from `Deuteronomy 6:13`,  “Thou shalt fear the LORD thy God, and serve him, and shalt
swear by his name.”

Jesus clearly perceived that one could not worship both Satan and God. He had to choose whom he
would serve, and identify clearly who was truly the “winner” in space and time, and it is not Satan
in the end.

Luke does not give the words, “Get thee hence, Satan”, for he has another temptation to narrate.
This indicates that the Matthew passage is chronological as it culminates in the King of the Jews
being offered the final prize, World domination without the Cross.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:9-11
    :bold:

Luke in this verse uses the verb “ago”, which means “to bring”, while Matthew uses the word
paralambano “to take”; both concepts are correct.  In both cases the Lord goes to the Temple and is
placed on a buttress of the Temple well above the valley below** .**

Satan now miss-quotes the passage of Scripture. Dashing the foot against a stone is an idiom for
falling. Satan added the three words, " at any time", to `Psalm 91:11,12`, in an attempt to make the
promise all encompassing. He adds to distort the Word of God as seen in the verse below with Satan’s
addition in bold.

`Psalm 91:11, 12` states “For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy
ways.  12  They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.

`Luke 4:10,11` He shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee: 11  And in their hands they
shall bear thee up, lest [**at any time**] thou dash thy foot against a stone.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:12
    :bold:

“It is said”, is in the perfect passive indicative, which means it stands said in the past, with the
result that it remains constantly true in the future. This is a favourite way of quoting Scripture
in the New Testament.

Here Jesus quotes `Deuteronomy 6:16`. Each time in these three temptations He uses Deuteronomy
against the devil. The verse states, “Ye shall not tempt the LORD your God, as ye tempted him in
Massah.”  `Hebrews 3:7` – 4:10.

In the three temptations we therefore see the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride
of life being tested as per `1 John 2:15-17`, **“Love not the world, neither the things that are in
the world. If any  man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.  16  For all that is in
the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the
Father, but is of the  world.  17  And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that
doeth the will of God abideth for ever.”**

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:13
    :bold:

The enemy tried all his weapons, and was at all points defeated.  All during the forty days the
devil tempted him as we are told that He was tested in every way as we are yet without sin.
`Hebrews 4:12-16`.

“For a season” means until another good opportunity should return. We are thus to infer that the
devil returned to his attack from time to time. In the Garden of Gethsemane he tempted Jesus more
severely than here.  The enemy does the same with us today and we are urged at all times to be ready
and resist his advances in the filling of the Holy Spirit.  `Ephesians 5:18-20, 6:10-18, James
4:7-10, 1 Peter 5:5-11`.

He was here trying to thwart the purpose of Jesus to go on with God’s plan, to divert him at the
start. In Gethsemane the devil tried to make Jesus draw back from the culmination of the Cross with
all its agony and horror.  At all times the enemy’s desire relating to ourselves is the same – to
thwart the Plan of God for our life.  To distract, distort, or destroy the plan is always his aim.
When we walk in the Spirit in the light of the Word he has no chance of success.

Application
...........

By application after a great spiritual victory you are always vulnerable to temptation/testing
circumstances.

These temptations were unique to the Lord, as they included turning stones into bread, being offered
the kingdoms of the world and leaping from the Temple in Jerusalem. We cannot be tempted in these
areas.

Therefore we can be hungry but never relieve the hunger by turning stones into bread. In principle
however we are often tempted to operate independently to the Holy Spirit and follow our lusts rather
than the Plan of God.

Satan's idea is to promote mans works against God's work, man’s power and plans against God’s Plan
and the Holy Spirit’s power.  His aim is to ultimately set up a system whereby all men work together
in a moral way on the earth without the need of God. His concept is a false satanic Millennium, but
it will be called the “Great Tribulation” as his power when free to run is awful and evil.

By application do can often jump ahead of the Plan of God. This can be done in a number of ways, for
example getting married before you should, enter into paths that are not right, or ultimately by
committing suicide.

Many people are full of food but unhappy. They may have friends and possessions but without the Lord
Jesus Christ they are not truly alive.

It isn't food, friends, power, and possessions that count, it is the promises of God behind the food
which are important. You may not have food but you always have the promises behind the food. While
bread is required to sustain life it is a detail. Therefore what really sustains the believer in the
Christian life are the promises of God.

When times of testing occurs it is not what is in the Bible that is important; it is what you have
been able to retrieve from the Bible and have resident in your mind.

The widow who gave two mites walked into the Temple with the Promises of God and walked out with the
Promises of God. In general the poor give everything the rich nothing.

Dependence on God and fulfilling the Plan of God depends on our knowledge of the Word of God.

The believer can only become spiritually self sustaining by feeding on the Word and converting the
Word into strength by living faith. This is the same with Physical food.  `Hebrews 3:7` – 4:12.

It can be seen from the second temptation that not all Scripture applies to every situation.

The more mature a person is in the Word of God the more able he is to apply the appropriate
Scripture to a situation.

The words “him alone thou shalt serve” quoted by our Lord in repelling the offer of the kingdoms of
the world and their glamour needs to be applied today.

Jesus will warn men against trying to serve God and mammon in `Matthew 6:24`.  Satan, as the lord of
the evil world, constantly tries to win men to the service of the world and obscure their obligation
to serve God.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/HOLY SPIRIT:  MINISTRY TO JESUS CHRIST [see page 25]`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  FASTING [see page 69]`
- :doc:`doctrines/ANGELS:  SATAN - ADVERSARY`
- :doc:`doctrines/ANGELS`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  MATURITY - CROSS TO THE CROWN`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRIST:  KENOSIS OF CHRIST`

Commencement Of Jesus’ Ministry In Galilee
------------------------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:14-15
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:14
    :bold:

**In the power of the Spirit** - Luke in this verse gives a description of the Galilean Ministry
with two marked characteristics : the power of the Holy Spirit, and the rapid spread of Christ’s
fame.  Luke often notes the power of the Holy Spirit in the work of Christ.  Our word dynamite is
this same word Greek word “dunamis” used for power in this verse.  Work without the Holy Spirit’s
“dynamite” is no work at all.  Whatever men can do in their own strength is not spiritual, it is
physical and moral, and has no power to save man, or produce relationship with God.

**A fame** - An old Greek word found in the New Testament only here and in `Matthew 9:26`. It is
from the root word “phemi” meaning “to say”. It implies that His ministry caused talk to run rapidly
in every direction.  The word got out about his person and his power and all knew that something was
happening.   `Isaiah 55:4-7`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:15
    :bold:

Luke is fond of this mode of transition. Then verb to teach is the imperfect tense which describes
the custom of the Lord of continuously teaching. The synagogues were an open door to Jesus before
the hostility of the Pharisees was aroused.The present passive participle of the verb “glorified”
indicates a general admiration of Jesus everywhere. He was the most brilliant teacher of all time.
Even the rabbis had not yet learned how to ridicule and oppose Jesus, and even when they did, they
were not successful and murder was their only option to silence his teaching.  `John 15:18-27`.

Application
...........

Each of us has a part to play in the plan of God. The time is limited and we should act as a member
of whatever team the Lord has bound us into under the direction of the Holy Spirit.

When our term of service is over or curtailed the Lord provides for the message to go on with
others.

The messengers may be different but the message is eternal and unchangeable.

We are going to encounter opposition if we are active in God’s work.

To be effective in the Lord’s work we need to be controlled by the Holy Spirit.

It is our duty to seek out those who are sitting in the shadow of death, and to give the gospel to
them. Much of the world is lying in wickedness, as wicked and wretched as was the land of Zabulon
and Naphtali in the time of Jesus.

The Lord Jesus was able to enlighten them and every Christian should regard it a privilege, as well
as a duty, to imitate his Saviour in this, and to be permitted to show them the light of life.

There are two words which are translated repent in the New Testament, the one used here metanoeo and
another used for Judas metamelomai.

As can be seen both are compound verbs with the first part a common feature “meta” which means to
change. In the first case as stated above the change is in “noeo” your mind. The Greek word
“melamai” is your emotional pattern and means to deeply regret.

Whilst there can obviously be regret about one’s pre conversion lifestyle regeneration comes with a
change of attitude or mind about who Jesus Christ is. Many consider him to be a miracle worker, a
great example, a great teacher but for conversion we need to see Him as the God – man who personally
died as our Saviour as full payment for our sins.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/HOLY SPIRIT:  MINISTRY TO JESUS CHRIST [see page 25]`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  AMBASSADORSHIP [see page 56]`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  CONFESSION AND FORGIVENESS`
- :doc:`doctrines/GOSPEL OF SALVATION`
- :doc:`doctrines/KINGDOM`
- :doc:`doctrines/LIGHT`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  REPENTANCE`
- :doc:`doctrines/GOD:  SHEKINAH GLORY`

First Rejection At Nazareth
---------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:16-30
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:16
    :bold:

The verb “trepho”, which means brought up is in the perfect passive indicative, which means a state
of completion in past time.  Here Jesus comes back after a year of public ministry elsewhere and
with a wide reputation as shown in `Luke 4:15`, but for some time now Nazareth had not been his
home, and that fact may be implied by the perfect tense.

Another verb in the perfect tense is that of the word “etho” meaning custom and is a review of His
life as a child. We therefore know that as a child Jesus, not surprisingly, had the habit of going
to public worship in the synagogue, a habit that he kept up when a grown man.

It was the custom for the reader to stand except when the Book of Esther was read at the feast of
Purim when he might sit. It is not here stated that Jesus had been in the habit of standing up to
read here or elsewhere. It was his habit to go to the synagogue for worship, and he may have been a
reader. Since he entered upon his Messianic work his habit was to teach in the synagogues. This was
apparently the first time that he had done so in Nazareth. He may have been asked to read as Paul
was in Antioch in Pisidia [`Acts 13:15`]. The ruler of the synagogue for that day may have invited
Jesus to read and speak because of his now great reputation as a teacher. Jesus could have stood up
voluntarily and appropriately because of his interest in his home town.  There is much here we don’t
know……

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:17-19
    :bold:

In verse 17 at the proper stage of the service “the attendant” or “minister” took out a roll of the
law from the ark, unwrapped it, and gave it to some one to read. On Sabbath days some seven persons
were asked to read small portions of the law and prophets. This was the first lesson or Parashah.
This was followed by a reading from the prophets and a discourse, the second lesson or Haphtarah.
This last is what Jesus did.

“The book of the prophet Isaiah” is literally, “a roll of the prophet Isaiah.” Apparently Isaiah was
handed to Jesus without his asking for it. It was an honour that he was asked to perform. Jesus used
Deuteronomy in his temptations and now Isaiah for this sermon.  In the Holy Spirit’s direction the
roll is opened to around `Isaiah 61:1-3`.

He “Found the place”. He continued to unroll (rolling up the other side) till he found the passage
desired. It may have been a fixed lesson for the day, or it may have been His own choosing, but the
Holy Spirit led the whole process. At any rate it was of God’s choosing, as it allowed the Lord
Jesus Christ to introduce Himself as the promised Messiah. It is a free quotation from the
Septuagint that Luke gives, as this Greek version was known to his readers.

In verse 18 the phrase “Anointed me” is the aorist active indicative of the verb “Chrio” from which
Christ [Greek Christos] is derived, the Anointed One.

Isaiah is picturing the Jubilee year and the release of captives, and the promised return from the
Babylonian exile with the hope of the Messiah through it all. Jesus here applies this Messianic
language to himself. “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me”, as was shown at the baptism where he was
also “anointed” for his mission by the Father’s voice.

In verse 19 “the acceptable year of the Lord” does not mean that his ministry is to be only one year
in length as Clement of Alexandria and Origen argued. What he is saying is that the Messianic age
has come.

On the first day of the year of Jubilee the priests with sound of trumpet proclaimed the blessings
of that year. The Messiah on earth justly pictures Christ’s mission and message.  It may also have
been a Jubilee year that year.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:20-21
    :bold:

He closed the book or rather rolled up the roll and gave it back to the attendant who had given it
to him and who put it away again in its case. He now sat down. In taking his seat there was a sign
that he was going to speak instead of going back to his former seat. This was the usual Jewish
attitude for public speaking and teaching as seen in such areas as the Sermon on the Mount.

It was normal for an entire chapter of the prophets to be read so rolling up the scroll after only a
small portion of the reading was most unusual. As a result all eyes were fastened on him. The
imperfect tense shows that they in the synagogue constantly were gazing fixedly upon him.

The passage he read was `Isaiah 61:1, 2`a, “The Spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me; because the LORD
hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted,
to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound;  2  To
proclaim the acceptable year of the LORD”.

However He did no go on to complete verse 2,  “and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all
that mourn;” as the day of vengeance deals with the judgment at the Second Advent, not His ministry
at His First Advent, which are covered by the first verse and a half of the chapter.

Paul uses the verb “Atenizo” of the steady eager gaze of the people at Moses when he came down from
the mountain when he had been communing with God.  `2 Corinthians 3:7`. There was something in the
look of Jesus here that held the people spellbound for the moment, apart from the great reputation
with which he came to them. In small measure every effective speaker knows what it is to meet the
eager expectations of an audience, but this was special.

In verse 21 He began speaking. The moment of hushed expectancy was passed. These may or may not be
the first words uttered here by Jesus, as Luke is giving us an edited version, as remembered by
those who he had spoken to who were there. Often the first sentence is the crucial one in winning an
audience. Certainly this is an arresting opening sentence if this was the first one.

He said to this group, “Today this scripture stands fulfilled in your ears.” It is in the passive
voice, which means that the Scriptures have received fulfilment today.  It was a most amazing
statement and the people of Nazareth were quick to see the Messianic claim involved.  There was no
way these words of Jesus could mean anything other than a Messianic claim, but the people’s
expectations will get in the way of their interpretation.

Jesus could only mean that the real year of Jubilee had come, that the Messianic prophecy of Isaiah
had come true today, and that in him they saw the Messiah of prophecy. And it is no startling
Messiah whom Jesus here sets forth, but the one who forgives sin and binds up the broken-hearted for
the shortened passage deals with His first advent only. To the group attending the Synagogue that
Sabbath the words seemed too good to be true, and to be spoken here at Nazareth by one of their own
townsmen!

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:22-23
    :bold:

They all began to bear witness that the statements recorded in `Luke 4:14`, **“And Jesus returned in
the power of the Spirit into Galilee: and there went out a fame of him through all the region round
about”,** were not exaggerations as they had expected, but had foundation in fact if this was a fair
sample of his teaching. They began to wonder whether this was true as He proceeded with His message.

The words of grace here means that the words that came out of the mouth of Jesus in a steady stream
as shown by the present tense were very gracious. They are intrigued and entranced by the words, and
feel the positivity of them, but also they feel the challenge, and they will not be able to accept
that challenge.

This wonder gave way to bewilderment as they began to explain to themselves the situation. Is not
this Joseph’s son they said? Jesus appeared in Nazareth as the son of Joseph as Luke presents him.
Luke does not stop here to correct this misconception because the truth has been already presented
in detail in `Luke 1:28-38, 2:49`.  This popular conception of Jesus as the son of Joseph appears
also in `John 1:45`. The puzzle of the people was due to their previous knowledge of Jesus as the
carpenter, the carpenter’s son.

For Him now to appear as the Messiah, in Nazareth where he had lived and laboured as the carpenter,
was a concept impossible for the hearers to accept after thinking about it for a while.  The mood of
wonder and praise now quickly turned to doubt and hostility, a rapid and radical transformation of
emotion in the audience.

In verse 23 the word parable has a special application to a statement which involves a comparison.
The word physician is the point of comparison. Luke the physician alone gives this saying of Jesus.

The proverb means that the physician was expected to take his own medicine and to heal himself. This
statement in various forms appears not only among the Jews, but in Euripides and Aeschylus among the
Greeks, and in Cicero’s Letters and the Chinese also used to demand it of their physicians.

The point of the parable seems to be that the people were expecting him to make good his claim to
being the Messiah by doing here in Nazareth what they had heard of his doing in Capernaum and
elsewhere. “Establish your claims by direct evidence”, they are saying. This same appeal was
addressed to Christ on the Cross. There is a tone of sarcasm towards Jesus in both cases.

The phrase “Do also here” is the group telling Jesus to do it here in your own country and town, and
do it now. Jesus applies the proverb to himself as an interpretation of their real attitude towards
himself.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:24-27
    :bold:

Jesus in his refuting of the rejection in Nazareth refers to two incidents in the Old Testament; one
from the time of Elijah and the second during the ministry of his successor Elisha. In both cases
Gentiles were involved. There were many Jewish widows in the land during the three and a half years
of drought which featured prominently in Elijah’s ministry but he was sent a Gentile widow at
Zarephath. There were also many Jewish lepers but it was a Gentile leper Naaman who was healed.

These illustrations cause great dissent among the assembly and they are ready to kill Him.  The
Lord’s message was clear – that unless the Jewish people did better than their ancestors they would
be bypassed and the gentiles would receive blessing from God.  `Acts 7:51-60`.

In relation to the famine it is noted in `1 Kings 18:1` that the rain is said to have come in the
third year. However as shortages are not overcome overnight the famine lasted still longer as stated
above. Zarephath has been identified as the village of Surafend on the coast road between Tyre and
Sidon. The widow woman, a Gentile, was in the land of Sidon or Phoenicia, where Jesus himself will
go later.

In verse 27 we have the imperfect tense of eimi which means there continued to be many lepers. This
is followed by the passive voice of katharizo meaning to receive cleansing. This verb is where we
get the word catharsis from, with lepros obviously being the root of leper.  God healed a Gentile
and many Jewish lepers remained unhealed – how was this to be explained except in terms of judgment?
What was happening at this very time in northern Galilee and beyond; was it also a judgment?  The
people hated the very thought of this and went from cheering the local boy made good to hating him
and desiring his death.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:28-30
    :bold:

The people of Nazareth at once caught on and saw the point of these two Old Testament illustrations
of how God in two cases blessed the Gentiles instead of the Jewish people. The implication was
evident. Nazareth was no better than Capernaum if even half as good. He was under no special
obligation to do unusual things in Nazareth because he had been reared there. Town pride was
insulted and it at once exploded in a burst of rage.

They rose up and cast him forth which was the equivalent of forming a lynching mob. The headed
towards a brow of a hill which is on the south west side of Nazareth with a view of hurling him over
the overhanging cliff to His death. Murder was in the hearts of the people. By pushing him over they
hoped to escape technical guilt. At the site of the attempted murder is built a church called the
Church of Mary of the Fright.

Here again we see the progression of verbs with the participle “stand up”, preceding the action of
the main verb, the aorist tense of “throw out”. This is followed again by the aorist tense “lead
away”, with the purpose infinitive mood “throwing him over the cliff”.

In verse 30 however He slipped away and reflected, in the imperfect tense, he continued on His way.
This was a supernatural escape but one that left people baffled rather than awe struck – they had
their miracle – but it was his escape, not his dramatic action of healing or other “sign” on their
behalf.

Application
...........

The Word of God is about the person and work of the Lord Jesus Christ. We must however clearly and
rightly divide the Word of Truth to ensure that what we are examining applies to us.

Jesus Christ can be clearly seen in the Old Testament in typology such as the Tabernacle and in
prophecy.

We may find that we are not accepted in our Christian community especially if we have not arrived at
our present position from what may be considered the traditional background.

The mood of a congregation can change from admiration to deep anger in a matter of a few moments if
a teacher brings into a message that which they do not know or believe.

Digging into the Scriptures is a wonderful experience, but what you find may be controversial,
especially if you come from a group with strongly held traditions or rituals.

Jesus gives the first indication that rather than the Jews believing it will in fact be the Gentiles
who will respond in a far more positive manner than the Jewish nation.

The life and death of a Christian is designated by God and subject to His will. It was not the will
of the Father that the Lord Jesus Christ’s ministry be terminated by being thrown over a precipice
at Nazareth.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/MIRACLES:  PURPOSE [see page7]`
- :doc:`doctrines/MIRACLES OF CHRIST`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRIST: FIRST AND SECOND ADVENTS`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRIST:  HYPOSTATIC UNION – GOD - MAN`
- :doc:`doctrines/ELIJAH - POWER OF GOD`
- :doc:`doctrines/ELISHA - MIRACLES`

Cure Of Demoniac In The Synagogue
---------------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:31-37
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:31-32
    :bold:

In Mark’s account we note that Jesus entered into Capernaum. Here it says he came down. Both are
correct as Capernaum was down at a lower level than Nazareth. He is seen teaching on the Sabbath
with Mark adding that Jesus did not teach as the Scribes did, contrasting dull legalism with the
Lord’s teaching with authority and dynamic interpretation and application.  The traditional teaching
was a dry explanation of the text from earlier authorities, whereas Jesus read the Word of God and
taught directly from it in Holy Spirit anointed power.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:33-34
    :bold:

Here we note that there is demon possession right in the middle of the congregation, with a man with
an unclean devil within him, and yet no-one else had appeared to notice this. We as Christians, when
we see the word devil or demon assume that they are evil. We however have to remember that Luke is
primarily talking to the Greek community and they had a concept of both good and bad devils/spirits.
Luke is therefore confirming that the devil or demon he is talking about is evil.

Luke also mentions that when the demon spoke he spoke with a loud voice, or really a demonic scream
caused by the sudden contact of the demon with Jesus.  When the demon was approached by Jesus it
shrieked aloud and openly acknowledged his lordship over it, and the fear it felt that it was about
to be thrown out of the man.  We must remember that Jesus is “King of all human kings, and Lord of
all angelic lords”, good and bad!  Every knee will bow before him in the end and the enemy fears
him.  `Romans 14:11, Philippians 2:10, 1 Timothy 6:15, James 4:19`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:35
    :bold:

In this verse Luke adds a couple of observations to the other synoptic accounts. Firstly that the
demon hurled down violently the person whom it had indwelt.  Luke then notes the fact that even
though the action was violent the person was not injured by it.  It is this doctor’s observation
that once again gives the ring of truth to this account, as Luke has spoken to observers of the man
himself, and has particularly asked the question a doctor alone would think of – did any harm come
from that throw?  Luke underlines the point made by the others, that Jesus will not accept any
testimony from evil forces.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:36-37
    :bold:

Here there is additional information about the reaction of the people at the synagogue that Sabbath.
The imperfect tense of the verb “spake” shows that they continuously spoke of what had happened from
that point onwards.

Luke also adds the verb “dunamai” to their comments, showing that they saw not only authority which
was unusual, but also dynamic power in the Lord’s ministry.  The demonic forces were simply and
effectively overpowered by Jesus with a word.  None of the tricks and incantations of the exorcists
were required, he appeared and they trembled, and he simply spoke and the demons fled his presence.

The word for fame is “echos”, which has the concept of a very audible or powerful rumour, much like
the roar of the waves on a shore. It had certainly been a dynamic day. No-one now doubted that he
had power, but what did it mean and from where was its source?  What would he use his power to
achieve?

Application
...........

We should ensure that we teach the Word of God and apply it to our lives rather than the ritual and
traditions of the church group we attend.  We are not here to perpetuate ritual, but to spread
truth.

God wants an obedient heart and a life lived in the truth, not slavery to ritual.

It is possible to have wolves in sheep clothing within the church. It is the duty of the church
leadership to look out for those who are false brethren and protect the flock from them.  The false
brethren are often the most respectable people, but the fruit of their life when faced with the holy
demands of the Word will be evil fruit.

We are told to resist the devil and he will flee from us.

As a believer, greater is he that is in you [the Holy Spirit – God] than he who is in the world
[Satan].  `1 John 4:4`.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/LEGALISM`
- :doc:`doctrines/ANGELS:  DEMONS`
- :doc:`doctrines/ANGELS:  SATAN'S STRATEGY`
- :doc:`doctrines/ANGELS:  SATAN'S WORK`

Cure Of Peter's Wife's Mother
-----------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:38-39
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:38-39
    :bold:

The word arose in verse 38 could relate to the teacher’s seat occupied by the teacher during
synagogue meetings or to the fact that he simply left the synagogue.

“And they besought him for her”, either his disciples Peter, Andrew, James, and John, who were all
present, or the other relations and friends of the sick person, which were in the house.  They all,
having heard of his casting out the unclean spirit in the synagogue, believed that he had power to
heal this disease, even though it looked fatal, therefore pleaded that Jesus would come and restore
her health before she died.

The phrase “stood over her” used here in Luke indicates the attitude of a doctor attending a
patient. Again we see the fever leaving her immediately, her strength restored and her using the
gift of ministry to the Lord and his disciples.

Application
...........

We should remember that “with God nothing is impossible”, `Luke 1:37`, but miracles of healing and
the like are the prerogative of God.

In the sixth chapter of the Revelation God allows further martyrdom by believers in the Tribulation
even though those who have already been martyred are asking Him in heaven to deal with the regime
which is doing this. The Lord says that they are to rest awhile until the proper time for action
according to His plan. [`Revelation 6:9-11`].

Healing miracles were used in the Bible to accredit men of God. Paul was able to heal early in his
ministry but was not able to heal Trophimus by his own gift, but he was healed by the Lord. `2
Timothy 4:20`.

Different believers in the body of Christ have different spiritual gifts which they can use for the
benefit of the Church. Each of the gifts are serving gifts and all are important. Some of the early
church gifts do not exist today.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/MIRACLES: HEALING AND MIRACLES`

Cure Of Many On The Same Evening
--------------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:40-41
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:40-41
    :bold:

Luke the doctor notes that there were presented a large variety of diseases that night after the
Sabbath at Peter’s house.We also note another of the details which only occurs in this account
involving the laying on of the Lord’s hands. The present active participle “epitithemi” showing the
Lord touching each individual and the imperfect active indicative of “therapeo”, picturing the
healing one by one with the tender touch upon each one.

This graphic detail was more than a mere ceremonial laying on of hands. Clearly the cures of Jesus
reached the physical, mental, and spiritual planes of human nature. He is Lord of life and acted
here as Master of each case as it was presented to him in love by family and friends.

The demons here were more specific than the demon dealt with at the synagogue as they cried out,
“Thou art Christ the Son of God”, echoing the statement of God Himself, but Jesus tells them to stop
talking, as He is not going to accept testimony from any Satanic source.

Application
...........

There is the witness of the fruit of a person’s life which should clearly indicate that a person is
a Christian.

These healing miracles show clearly that Jesus was absolutely able to cure all the sick and demon
possessed people in the world and yet did not do so.

This shows that while having great compassion for people the purpose of the miracles was to show
people that the Messiah was with them.  He came to go to the Cross to deal with the bigger enemy,
not to establish a hospital from where people could drop into Hell.

It is seen that demons, which are fallen angels, recognize Jesus Christ as the Son of God, but this
fact does not give them comfort as James states, “the demons believe and they tremble”.  `James
4:19`.

It is of interest that demons inhabit warm blooded mammals such as man, and in the case of the
demoniac of the Gadarenes a group of pigs.

An analogy has been drawn between the healing miracles in `Matthew 8` and the ministry of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

It is as tabulated below

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/HEALING:  THERE IS NO HEALING IN THE ATONEMENT`

Circuit Through Galilee
-----------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:42-44
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:42
    :bold:

An analysis of this verse shows that after the prayer time in a solitary place he was led [passive
voice of “poreuomai”] into a wilderness area.

This verse now deals with the multitudes not Peter. Because of His isolation Jesus was not easily
found, as seen by the imperfect tense of “zeteo”.  The Lord has a plan to follow and it is not to be
the plan that others have for him.

The multitudes kept this up until they found Him at some time this morning as shown by the aorist
tense of “erchomai” and then they continued to delay Him, as seen in the Imperfect tense of
“katecho”, that he remain and minister to them.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 4:43-44
    :bold:

However Jesus felt the urge to go on with the work of evangelism “to the other cities also,” to all,
not to a favoured few. He was sent as the great Apostle of God to preach the gospel of the coming
kingdom of God and he headed out to speak in all the Galilee, so that all could hear the message who
desired to.

Application
...........

Jesus Christ is prophet priest and king but he does not function in all the roles at the same time.
During His earthly ministry He was among other things a prophet, he is now our High Priest, and will
reign as King of the Jews during the Millennium.

We are told again that the Lord Jesus Christ had a wide ranging ministry; He taught in the
synagogues, preached the gospel of the kingdom, healed the sick and cast out demons.

Many can understand this mood of Jesus when in the night he slips away to a solitary place for
prayer.

Jesus knew what it was to spend a whole night in prayer. He knew the blessing of prayer and the
power of prayer.

It is important that we know our part in the plan of God and walk with Him to be really effective.

There can be many areas of ministry and we need to know when to move on and when to stay.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/PRAYER – see page 68`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRIST:  PROPHET, PRIEST AND KING`

