Chapter 16
==========

Parable Of Unjust Steward
-------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 16:1-18
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 16:1-2
    :bold:

One of the basic dogmas of the Pharisees teaching was that whoever God loved those he made
materially rich, not unlike the false so called “prosperity gospel” of today. Conversely if you are
poor God’s blessing is not on you according to the Pharisees.   Riches therefore was a sign of
divine favour, and if you were rich, they believed, you were guaranteed entrance into the Kingdom.
As a result the Pharisees concentrated on becoming wealthy because it was a sign of God’s blessing
on them.  This false viewpoint will be challenged by the Lord Jesus, and in our day with so much
“prosperity gospel” evil being preached, we must hear the Lord’s rebuke clearly.

Many well to do landowners had managers or stewards to oversee their estates. In this parable we see
a steward who has been found to have squandered the wealth of a rich man by fraudulently and
selfishly misusing the funds that were committed to him. The “jet setting” and corrupt steward was
told by the owner of the estate to give an account of his stewardship, as he was “under
investigation” and was going to lose his position if he was proved corrupt and wasteful.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 16:3-4
    :bold:

As a result the steward “said within himself”, or considered his position, and his future options.
He decided that he could not dig, as that was a menial task, usually performed by captive slaves or
others with no skills. Also it would be below his dignity to beg, so he decided to use his remaining
time cunningly/wisely to prepare for the time when he would be redundant. He decided the make some
new friends who would then open their doors to him when his job finished.  He also covered his
earlier corrupt practises by his “generosity” so that no-one would report his earlier indiscretions.
He was wise enough to know that his time was up and he had to change his entire modus operendi or he
would lose all!

The Pharisees are of course not smart enough to realise that their “game is up”.  This man does and
acts decisively.  Remember, as we go through this parable, the Lord doesn't approve this steward’s
corruption, but he does approve his realistic appraisal of what an audit will mean, and that he acts
decisively to secure his future.  It is this level of change that the Pharisees need to practise.
`Proverbs 20:4, 30:5-10`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 16:5-7
    :bold:

He now uses his financial skills and shrewdness to make himself  friends of possible future clients,
by discounting the bills that his estate had against them. A hundred measures of oil represented the
yield of about 150 trees while the measure of wheat was the production of about 100 acres or 40
hectares of land.  This man has been adding to the bills and then spending the money on his life
style, so all the bills are inflated – by reducing the amounts his suppliers feel better disposed
towards him.

They were considerable financial transactions for the world at that time, so it tell us that he has
been “creaming” off a sizeable amount of money through the years of his stewardship, but also he has
been making a great deal for his master, so it has been a “win-win” situation. They are saved about
500 denarii or a year and a half wages by the steward. These therefore are large and well to do
farmers, who may well use the soon to become redundant stewards’ services in the future.  He is
giving out the message that he is efficient and effective, even if he carries a big bag!

.. biblepassage:: Luke 16:8
    :bold:

The owner is in a bit of a predicament now, because the money he expected had been reduced, but he
is also wanting to be seen as a benevolent person, and so because of this act of the steward he
commends the steward for his business arrangements.  He has acted to restore equity, and everyone
now looks upon the estate management in a better light, and no-one now is being “ripped off”, and
the owner has a clue to the good financial accounting of this man.  He decides its better to keep
him on than have him go to the opposition, especially as he has “cut his margin” back.

The word translated “wisely” in this verse should be better translated “shrewdly”. The word wisely
generally indicates doing something noble and good. This certainly is not the case as demonstrated
above where the rulers invoices have been inflated and then downgraded. The master commended the
steward for his shrewdness and observes that unbelievers are generally wiser than the children of
light; the believers in financial affairs.  This may also be a dig at the Pharisees, as they thought
they were pretty shrewd in business, but they were being ripped off by their own servants most of
the time, and should take lessons in business from their slaves.  `Psalm 49:7-12`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 16:9
    :bold:

The “Mammon of unrighteousness” is a common Rabbinical term of the time for the realm of worldly
material things, it is all that the world has to offer in a material way.  What Jesus is saying is
that we are to use the material things of this world as is appropriate, but without being addicted
or dependent upon them, for we do not know when we live or die.  `Luke 12:16-21`, and below `Luke
16:19-31`.

The word translated “of” is the Greek word “Ek”, which means “out of or through”. Jesus is not
saying that we should become materialistic, but that through the material things of this world that
we have available, we should be winning friends for Christ.  We are to utilize all the space and
time assets we have for eternal purposes.

The phrase “ye fail” appears to be a second person singular of the verb “Ekleipo” ,which means to
fail or cease. The verb however is the aorist active subjunctive third person singular, meaning it
is he, she or it, rather than you who fail or cease.  Our space and time assets will always “fail”
or cease, because they all rust, decay, burn, get lost/stolen, or wear out.  It is only the eternal
value we find in the use of them that gives them any value at all.

Everlasting habitations refer to heaven. So an interpretation of verse 9 is, “And I say unto you,
Make to yourselves friends through material things so that when they fail, they [the friends] may
receive you into everlasting habitations [heaven].  As Christians we are therefore obligated to use
the material things of this world to win friends for Christ, to act in such a way with any wealth we
have so as to build eternal assets for the Lord’s work.

Some of these people we have won a hearing from through our use of our material things will pass
ahead of us, and so when we die, those who have predeceased us and preceded us to heaven, will be
there to greet us into the eternal tabernacles of heaven.  We have won eternal friends by our
temporal intelligence in our use of things.  As the great missionary-martyr to the South American
Indians said, “A man is no fool who gives away what he cannot hold, to gain what he cannot lose”.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 16:10-12
    :bold:

Here again is the principle that we need to have some life skills to be able to serve the Lord, and
often performance in the material world on the basis of grace will determine the level of
opportunities we receive in the spiritual realm.  It is always unwise to trust Christian workers who
have failed to perform in the ordinary business world.  People who have not the energy,
determination and skill sets to be successful in business will not be successful in the Lord’s work,
for the Lord requires greater energy, enthusiasm, and skills.  `Romans 14:18, 2 Corinthians 10:18, 2
Timothy 2:15`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 16:13
    :bold:

The question is now asked as to who we are serving, is it God or mammon?  It is a blunt and
demanding question for us all in the Lord’s work.  You cannot serve both God and materialism; they
are mutually exclusive. God says that He will not tolerate us having other gods.  The Lord’s service
and approval must be the most important thing in our life.  `James 4:1-6`.

In the western world particularly materialism is grossly rampant, with huge amounts of time and
energy being placed on material objects and the lust for money. Other idols in Australia include
sport. It is easy to have “idols”, and these are any things that take time, effort and resources
that should be given over to the Lord.  Certain things are mutually exclusive simply because they
are time robbers – once you have spent your time on the one thing there is nothing left for the
other.  Satan is subtle, but ruthless, and when there is nothing left for God he has won!

.. biblepassage:: Luke 16:14-18
    :bold:

As always the Pharisees who were greedy for material things and wealth rejected the teachings of our
Lord by ridicule. Jesus again tells the Pharisees they are wrong, and they are going about things in
a way which is going to prevent them going to heaven. They are placing great weight upon their
concept that a rich man is blessed by God.  `Romans 6:15-23`.

Jesus says that material wealth used for selfish purposes is an abomination before God. He again
returns to this theme in `Luke 18:24, 25`,  **“And when Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful, he
said, How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God! 25  For it is easier for
a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.”**

He says that everyone who wants to enter into the Kingdom has to struggle with the value they place
on things, and their violent attempt to keep their wealth for themselves is like the struggle a
merchant has to force the overloaded camel through the narrow gate into the city.  They are
struggling to have it both ways, and you cannot – you are either addicted to worship and service of
the Lord, or you are addicted to things!  `Psalm 102:23-28, 139:1-5`.

Jesus now tells them that the Old Testament the Law and Prophets are unchangeable and will outlast
the universe and therefore that true teaching must come from the Bible, rather than the traditions
of doctrines of man, and he then refers back to the issue of proper and improper use of the law
regarding divorce.  Their financial dodgy dealings will always overflow into immorality!  Financial
impropriety and the addiction to money and power will easily overflow to sexual sins.  The Lord
calls them out on all their lusts and identifies that the only answer is to abandon their lust for
stuff, and surrender to service of the Lord in holy purity.

Application
...........

In financial circles the unbeliever generally has better money skills in preparation for the future
than the Christian. Christians sometimes have the attitude that they do not have to plan for the
future because God will take care of everything. Believers are challenged to be wise and hard
working, to succeed in the business world, as well as be successful in winning the battle over lust
for stuff.

God certainly has our future planned, but this should not be a reason to give for not planning for
the future of your family. In a family, if the breadwinner dies, there should be some planning as to
how the family are going to be supported. God however is in final control and it is his plan not our
own we follow.

As Christians we are therefore obligated to use the material things of this world to win friends for
Christ.

God’s purposes, in the minds of most people, are squeezed out of the conscious thoughts by
unrighteous mammon, or idolatry of any description.  It is a battle for the mind truly.

True teaching must come from the Bible rather than the traditions of doctrines of man.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/BIBLE:  BIBLE AND THE BELIEVER`
- :doc:`doctrines/BIBLE:  INERRANCY`
- :doc:`doctrines/BIBLE:  INSPIRATION`
- :doc:`doctrines/BIBLE :  INSPIRATION  FULFILLED PROPHECY PROOF OF INSPIRATION`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  GIVING - STEWARDSHIP`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  STEWARDSHIP`
- :doc:`doctrines/IDOLATRY`
- :doc:`doctrines/MONEY`
- :doc:`doctrines/WEALTH`

The Rich Man And Lazarus
------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 16:19-31
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................



.. biblepassage:: Luke 16:19-21
    :bold:

Here we need to refer back to the Pharisaic dogma that if a person is materially rich he is blessed
by God, and is eligible to enter the pleasant part, the place of blessing of eternity. Jesus is
talking to the Pharisees and is again going to show that their views on this topic are 100% wrong.
`James 5:1-5`.

We need to remember that at this time no human being who had died went to heaven as Christians now
do. `2 Corinthians 5:8`. Prior to the payment for sin by the Lord Jesus Christ at the Cross, and His
subsequent resurrection, all the believers went to Hades, to a place called Abraham’s bosom or
Paradise.   The Lord emptied that part of Hades at his Ascension and now believers are “absent from
the body and face to face with the Lord” in heaven. `Acts 7:55-59, 1 Corinthians 13:12, 2
Corinthians 5:6-9, Ephesians 4:8`.

This is shown by the Lord’s promise to the repentant gangster on the Cross, “This day shalt thou be
with me in Paradise”, as well as the appearance of Samuel at the Witch of Endor event where Samuel
asks, “Why did you bring me up”, indicating that Hades or Sheol was located below the earth’s
surface.  `Luke 23:43, 1 Samuel 28:12-20`.

Unbelievers, from the death of the first unbeliever, have always gone to Hades/Torments, a separate
compartment of Sheol or Hades. There is an additional area where the angels who disobeyed at the
time of the flood are kept for judgment.  As noted above, after Christ’s victory at the Cross the
Old Testament believers were transferred to heaven where we all proceed on death as believers in the
Lord Jesus, the victor over sin and death.

Lazarus who is not to be confused with the brother of Mary and Martha, also called Lazarus, who
Christ raised, for this man was a beggar who was “thrown”, from the Greek word “Ballo”, at the gate
of the rich man, with a view of being provided with scraps of food from the rich man’s table. The
Lazarus who was raised from the dead in resuscitation was not a beggar.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 16:22-24
    :bold:

From the Pharisees viewpoint it would appear quite unlikely that Lazarus would be welcomed into
heaven due to his very poor situation on earth. However as amazing as it was to the Pharisees, this
Lazarus was a mature believer, and as such received dying grace, and was transported by angels into
Paradise.  Their theology did not allow for such things as a believer being poor at death, and they
could not think of God accepting people that they would not accept!

The rich man, who thought because of his riches he was a sure candidate for heaven, dies and finds
himself in Torments. Lifting up his eyes he can see Abraham afar off in the saved part of hades, and
shock and horror to him, he sees Lazarus the beggar hugging Abraham and enjoying sweet fellowship
with him.

As a Jew he addresses Abraham as his father, which he is, pleading for mercy, and asking that
Lazarus be sent across to him with some water because he is being tormented by flames.  This clearly
shows that after the death of the body the soul continues to function.  It is a torment he
describes, but not a flame that destroys him – he is conscious of his torment and now seeks solace
from the man he despised in life.   Note he does not feel worthy to ask Abraham to come, but expects
that a worthless fellow like Lazarus may be sent on errands by Abraham, like the slave he still
thinks he is!  This man is still arrogant in Hell itself.  `Isaiah 14:9-11`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 16:25-26
    :bold:

Abraham points out that the rich man had received good things during his physical life, while
Lazarus had had a hard life, and was especially under pressure at the end. However Lazarus had
become a believer through his earthly torment, while the rich man had enjoyed his material wealth
and comfort, but had not cared for eternal realities.  Because Lazarus had believed he was now
comforted, whereas the rich man either rejecting or ignoring a relationship with God, was now in a
place of torments.

It is also noted that there is no opportunity to go from one side to another, so that the status of
a person at the time of their death is the status for eternity.  This absolute status at death is
the flip side of the gospel message – men can ignore the Son of God in time, but at death He becomes
their judge – there is no other alternative for them but to bow their knee then.  `Hebrews 9:26-28,
Romans 14:11, Philippians 2:10`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 16:27-31
    :bold:

The rich man seeing his circumstance thinks of his five brothers at home and wants to warn them of
the terrible penalty for ignoring the claim of God on their lives.  The Jews were very much into
signs and have been offered one sign, that of the prophet Jonah, which represents being delivered
from death and given back life, the sign is the resuscitation from the dead of Jonah, and Lazarus
the brother of Mary and Martha and many others in the Lord’s three year ministry, with even more
after his bodily resurrection.

It is no coincidence that the one requested to be resuscitated is named Lazarus, though not the same
one who will be resuscitated by our Lord. When the Lazarus our Lord healed rose from the dead, which
was the sign of Jonah, they did not believe, even though he had come back from the dead.

Abraham says that even if someone rose from the dead they would not believe, however they have all
the evidence they need through the Old Testament.

As it was the Pharisees to whom this was mainly addressed, and their knowledge of the Old Testament
was unparalleled, it was a command for them to be like the Bereans of the book of Acts, to daily
search the Scriptures to see if what had been taught was the way to God, and Christ was the Messiah
as He claimed to be.

Application
...........

We see from this passage there is a separate destiny for the saved and unsaved with the division
being made at the death of the individual.

In addition the division is final, with no second chances. After death the soul is conscious and is
therefore eternal and is able to converse with and see and recognize others. We know that all, both
in heaven and hell, will acknowledge that Jesus Christ is who He always claimed to be, God’s son.

There is no other name under heaven whereby we must be saved.  Jesus said, “I am the way the truth
and the life”, and no man cometh to the Father except by Jesus Christ.

Signs and wonders, whilst held in high esteem by many, will not be accepted, and ultimately it is
the Word of God and the ministry of the Holy Spirit that allows for a person to be born from above.

Our riches and position in the end are of no consequence, as all attempts to enter heaven by our
works or riches are fruitless and an abomination to God. We must do God’s work, in God’s way.

There is comfort in a believer’s death called dying grace, as long as you are not dying the sin unto
death, whereas the death of an unbeliever is terrible, irrespective of how good you have had it in
life. All enjoyment that an unbeliever will ever have will be whilst he is physically alive.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/DEATH`
- :doc:`doctrines/DYING GRACE`
- :doc:`doctrines/HELL AND HADES`
- :doc:`doctrines/JUDGMENT:  BAPTISM OF FIRE`
- :doc:`doctrines/LAZARUS - PARADISE AND TORMENTS`

