Chapter 2
=========

The Birth Of Jesus In Bethlehem
-------------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:1-7
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:1
    :bold:

**And it came to pass in those days**, **that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus** –
“Those days” when John the Baptist was born, and Christ was conceived, and his mother heavily
pregnant with him, and the time of his birth drew on. The word those “ekeinos” translated those can
also mean, “that same or that very day”. It is so translated in the Ethiopic version which reads,
"in that day".

Interpreted in that light it was the same day in which John was circumcised, and Zacharias delivered
the above song of praise that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus through his rulers in
each Province of the Empire that a census was to be held for the purpose of determining taxation
revenues that each Province was capable of paying back to Rome.

Caesar Augustus was the second emperor of Rome; the name Caesar was a title common to all the later
emperors, as Pharaoh to the Egyptians, and afterwards Ptolemy.  His name Augustus, was not his
original surname, but Thurinus; and was given him, after he became Caesar, to express his grandeur,
majesty, and reverence.

**“that all the world should be taxed”**; or "registered", or "enrolled"; for this was not levying a
tax, or imposing tribute upon them, but a taking an account of the names of persons, and of their
estates. For the payment of a tax there was no need of the attendance of women and children.

The Arabic version gives the translation, "that the names the whole habitable world might be
described, or written down":  The word apographo is translated To write off, Enrol, Taxed [Perfect
Passive Infinitive] but with the perfect passive infinitive it indicates that they received a
writing down for a purpose, such as an enrolment for future taxation

This enrolment had been first considered by Augustus, when at Tarracon in Spain, over twenty years
before. It was however deferred by problems in the empire. The timing of the edict is again seen as
part of God’s plan as it had to coincide with Joseph and a pregnant Mary being obliged to travel the
long distance from Nazareth to Bethlehem to fulfil the prophecy that the Messiah would be born in
Bethlehem of Judea.

The quotation that “all the world” would be taxed would also be rendered that the whole of the Roman
Empire would be enrolled. It would therefore seem that it was not just Judea or Israel but the whole
Roman Empire which at this stage is said to have a population of 120 million would be enrolled which
would be no mean feat.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:2
    :bold:

**And this taxing was first made should be better stated **"this was the first enrolment, or taxing"
in the Jewish nation; for there was another afterwards, when Judas the Galilean arose, and drew many
after him, `Acts 5:38`.

**when Cyrenius was governor of Syria**

Luke has been attacked here on the basis that Quirinius was only governor of Syria once, and that
was from A.D. 6 as shown by Josephus Antiquities, but Professor William Ramsay proved by
inscriptions discovered in the 1890s, that Quirinius was twice Governor in Syria, and that Luke
quite expectedly is correct here also.

**The Date of the Birth of Christ**

An error in calculation by Dionysius the Younger, who in the 6th century introduced the present
method of dating made the Birth of Christ coincide with the Roman year 754 whereas further studies
as outlined below show that it should have been 747 or 748 which would make it 6 or 7 BC.

We know that Jesus had to be born before 4 BC because the death of Herod occurred in the northern
spring of 4 BC. The Wise Men who interviewed Herod were seeking the Christ child and found Him
together with Mary and Joseph as a young child in a house. The child was probably about 18 months
old. This is further indicated by the fact that Herod ordered all male children 2 years old and
younger to be killed in an attempt to eliminate the Christ child.

Josephus, the Jewish historian, tells us that in the start of the governorship of Quirinius in 8 BC,
Herod spent the whole of the year outside Jerusalem fighting a war against the Parthians. Josephus
also tells us that in 5 BC Herod left Jerusalem and went to Jericho and stayed there until his
death.

From this information we see that the Lord Jesus Christ was born either in 7 or 6 BC.  It does not
matter greatly what the date is, as the calendar is all guess work in the cross over from BC to AD
anyway.  The ancients worked a Lunar Calendar, and we a Solar Calendar.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:3
    :bold:

There was therefore a huge movement across the Roman Empire with people going to the cities of their
lineage. This could well explain why there was a shortage of accommodation in Bethlehem forcing Mary
and Joseph to have to stay in the stable or cave under/attached to the inn.

The concept of a Roman census was originally instituted by Servius Tullius, sixth king of Rome.
Dionysius of Halicarnassus says that, “He ordered all the citizens of Rome to register their estates
according to their value in money, taking an oath, in a form he prescribed, to deliver a faithful
account according to the best of their knowledge, specifying the names of their parents, their own
age, the names of their wives and children, adding also what quarter of the city, or what town in
the country, they lived in.”

A Roman census appears to have consisted of these two parts:

1. The account which the people were obliged to give in of their names, quality, employments, wives,
children, servants, and estates; and

2. The value set upon the estates by the censors, and the proportion in which they adjudged them to
contribute to the defence and support of the state, either in men or money, or both: and this seems
to have been the design of the census or enrolment in the text.

This census was probably similar to that made in England in the reign of William the Conqueror,
which is contained in what is termed Domesday Book, now in the Chapter House, Westminster, and dated
1086.

**“Each to his own city”** - A number of papyri in Egypt have the heading enrolment by household.
Here again Luke is vindicated. Each man went to the town where his family register was kept.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:4
    :bold:

Both Mary and Joseph went to Bethlehem as this was the city of David and they were both descended
from David, Joseph from Solomon, and Mary from Nathan.[ See section 4 above].

The phrase “went up”, the Greek word Anabaino, which is translated “climbed” or “ascended”, is
accurate as Bethlehem is at a higher elevation than Nazareth.  The city of David, which is
Bethlehem, was where David was born and brought up `1 Samuel 17:12`, According to `Micah 5:2` this
was the place where the Messiah was to be born.

Bethlehem means "the house of bread": a very fit place for Christ, the bread which came down from
heaven, and gives life to the world, to come from.  `John 6:32-58`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:5
    :bold:

Mary was heavily pregnant and yet, though in such difficult circumstances, was obliged by this Roman
edict, to come to Bethlehem.  Joseph could not leave Mary in the Galilee, but for protection of her
reputation needed to be down here in Bethlehem, where the birth of Jesus could also be registered.

By being obedient to the government even though it was greatly inconvenient to her because of her
condition she was able to conform with the prophecy of Micah.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:6
    :bold:

Mary had up to this time been living at the wrong place for Messiah's birth. A little longer stay at
Nazareth, and the prophecy would have failed. But with no intention certainly on her part, much less
of Caesar Augustus, to fulfil the prophecy, she is brought from Nazareth to Bethlehem, and at
exactly the right time the period of pregnancy is completed and her baby is born in the cave under
the inn at Bethlehem.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:7
    :bold:

Jesus is called Mary's firstborn, because she had no children before him. Even though she might not
have any after him he would still be called the firstborn and was holy to the Lord, `Exodus 13:2`.

Christ, as to his human nature; was Mary's firstborn; and as to his divine nature, God's firstborn.

Swaddling clothes are not normal baby clothes, they are bands of cloth used for binding up the dead.
The cave under the Inn doubled up as the place for preparing bodies, as well as stabling the animals
in the winter.  The swaddling cloths were stored there to wrap the bodies of the dead.  This
indicate even at this very early stage of our Lord’s life that he was born to die.

There was no cradle so the Saviour of the world was placed in a feeding trough. The shows the abject
poverty that the Lord Jesus Christ was born into.  This couple have lost everything by heading down
to Bethlehem, and whatever money they had is not enough to buy clothes for the baby immediately, and
it would appear that they are caught out by the birth.

As outlined above the pressure of accommodation for those arriving for the census was such that the
Holy Family were unable to find decent lodgings, but at least the cave/stable was warm and dry, and
God’s creatures were there to welcome their Creator enter the world.

Application
...........

God will use the actions of man as a vehicle to further His plans and purposes.

A census, conceived by a pagan emperor, which is a sensible concept under the fourth divine
institution of nationalism, was delayed, and used in perfect harmony with God’s timing, to ensure
that a promise he had made many centuries before would be fulfilled.

“This is the Lord’s doing. It is marvelous in our eyes”.  `Psalm 118:23`.

We as Christians are to comply with the reasonable requirements of our national entity, even though
we may find at the time that such requirements are difficult for us. It is part of our Christian
testimony.

Christ who was rich became poor so that we who are poor could become rich. As a baby he was
identified with death so that we could be identified with new life in Him.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/NATIONS`

Announcement To The Shepherds
-----------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:8-14
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:8
    :bold:

Shepherds were common in the area around Bethlehem. It was near Bethlehem that David kept his
father’s flocks. `1 Samuel 17:15`,  “But David went and returned from Saul to feed his father's
sheep at Bethlehem.”

The shepherds abiding in the fields keeping watch over their flocks by night shows that at the time
of the nativity the flocks were out in the fields during the night, and that was predominantly
October-November at this time, after that time the flocks were secured in stone enclosures overnight
due to the winter temperatures.

The words translated keeping watch is in the plural indicating that there were multiple watches,
with a number o shepherds working together to protect their investment in the sheep. The watches
during the night lasted three hours. The night was therefore divided into four watches, the even,
midnight, cock crowing, and morning. The reason why they watched them in the field appears to have
been, either to preserve the sheep from beasts of prey, such as wolves or foxes, or from the bandit
bands which roamed through the land of Judea at that time.

It was a custom among the Jews to send out their sheep to the open pasture lands, about the
Passover, and bring them home at the commencement of the first rain. The Passover occurred in the
spring, and the first rain began early in the month of Marchesvan, which is equivalent to our
October or November.

We find that the sheep were kept out in the open country during the whole of the summer. During the
time they were out, the shepherds watched them night and day. As these shepherds had not yet brought
home their flocks, it is a probable that October had not yet commenced. It is concluded that our
Lord was not born on the 25th of December. So when was our Lord born?

“Fabricius gives a list of no less than 136 different opinions concerning the date of Christ’s
birth: and as to his birth. To show the diversity of months we note that: the Egyptians placed it in
January - Wagenseil, in February - Bochart, in March, Clemens Alexandrinus, in April, others, in
May, Epiphanius speaks of some who placed it in June and of others who supposed it to have been in
July, Wagenseil, who was not sure of February, fixed it probably in August, Lightfoot, on the 15th
of September - Scaliger, Casaubon, and Calvisius, in October and others, in November. The Roman
Catholic Church, supreme in power, and infallible in judgment, placed it on the 25th of December,
the very day on which the ancient Romans celebrated the feast of their goddess Bruma – the winter
solstice.”

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:9
    :bold:

It may be Gabriel, who had brought the tidings of the conception of the Messiah to the virgin, who
now revealed the birth of Jesus to the shepherds.  The phrase “came upon them”, indicates that it
was all of a sudden, unexpectedly, at once. He stood by them or as some versions render it, stood
over them, over their heads, just above them; so that he was easily and perfectly seen by them.

The messenger brought a very glorious and extraordinary light by which they could discern the
illustrious form of the angel that was over them. At the sight of such glory, and the brightness of
the angel, they were overawed with the majesty of God, and were conscious of their own sinfulness
and frailty.  `Isaiah 6:1-10`.

“They were sore afraid” is a phrase in the Greek, “Phobeo Megas Phobos”, which literally translated
means “fearful great fear”.  They were greatly fearful.  Evaluation of the structure of the verb
reveals the reality of the fear, with the Indicative mood with the passive voice showing they
received fear, and the aorist tense, that the great fear was received at a point in time.  When
people see real angels, rather than just dream the event, there is great fear, for when creatures of
eternity touch time and space there is great fear – this is awesome indeed.  `Daniel 10:11-19`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:10
    :bold:

The angel immediately sets about allaying the fears of the shepherds assuring them that he is
bringing a message of great joy. The great joy is that the Saviour of the world has been born in
Bethlehem.  The order of the angel not to fear is the common one when angels really appear, for they
bring awe in their wake.  In our day we have many fake appearances of angels, and also deceptive
appearances of satanic demonic forces in the form of beautiful female angels.  The genuine article
always is male, and always brings awe and fear to all who see them, and immediately allays that fear
with a word form the Lord.  The angel also always requires something of the person (obey a command)
seeing them.

The effect of this birth on all mankind is pivotal. It was not a great joy to many individuals. It
was not a great joy to Herod and his courtiers, who were troubled at it; nor to the greater part of
the Jewish nation, who when he came to them, received him not, but rejected him as the Messiah. It
was particularly not a great joy to the chief priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, who when they saw
him, said, this is the heir, let's kill him, and seize on the inheritance.

However to all that were waiting for him, and were looking for redemption in Israel; to all sensible
sinners who rejoice at his birth, and in his salvation; to all the people of God, whether Jews or
Gentiles it was the cause of great joy. God’s plan had moved another major step forward towards its
ultimate conclusion.  What is our response to the King?  It is only by the fruit of our response to
the King and his message that our destiny is fully known.  `Psalm 67:1-2, 98:1-6`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:11
    :bold:

The word for day is for a natural day, consisting both of night and day. It would appear that Jesus
Christ was born in the night. The Jewish traditions had said that the future redemption shall be in
the night. Also it was a tradition of the Jews that Christ would come in the middle of the night.
`Genesis 3:16`. 49:10, `Psalm 24:7-10, Isaiah 9:6, Daniel 9:24-26`.

The angel does not say, "unto us", but "unto you", unto you – all men who will receive Him.  He has
come not merely for the shepherds, or the Jews only, but the Gentiles also.  He has come for all the
spiritual seed of Abraham, all elect of mankind.

He is born in the city of David; that is, Bethlehem, confirming the prophecy of `Micah 5:2` (710
BC): “But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of
thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of
old, from everlasting.”

It is noted that at the time of Micah in the 8th Century BC, the settlement of Bethlehem was small.
It was one of four towns of the name of Bethlehem’s in the area conquered by the Jews. Bethlehem of
Judea therefore had to be distinguished from Bethlehem of Zebulun mentioned in `Joshua 19:15,16`,
and the other two elsewhere.

That the prophecy related to the Messiah is clear from the statement that this future ruler of
Israel who had been promised under the Davidic covenant in `2 Samuel 7:16`, was one whose goings
forth have been from of old, from everlasting. The person referred to therefore had eternal life and
would give eternal life to all.

In this verse the person born is noted as the Saviour, who is Christ the Lord, or “Messiah the
King”. The person here is seen as the unique God man as he is not only the Saviour but also the Lord
or God.  As Christ he has come from God the Father to undertake God’s plan**.**

The birth of such a person must be joyful, and is obviously to be seen as good news and glad
tidings.  `John 10:10`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:12
    :bold:

Why was this a sign to them? Certainly it would be most unusual to find a child in a manger in a
stable especially a future King of the Jews.  This was also a child wrapped in the bandages for
covering the dead – not the choice of most parents of the time!

Though there might be many other children, in the inn, none of them would be lying in a manger or in
swaddling clothes. What were “swaddling clothes”?  These were the strips of linen used in the
ancient world for preparing the dead for burial. The sign was that this baby had been born to die.
The fact he was wrapped in swaddling clothes was a sign that He was the Saviour whose death would
pay the penalty of sin. Lying in a manger shows how the Lord came in grace with great humility.

Had not the angel given them this direction, they would never have thought to have looked for Him in
such a place. In addition it might have been a stumbling block to their acceptance of him, had they
not been told beforehand where he was.  There was one main place in the town where a child would be
wrapped in “burial bandages” – the place where bodies were treated in that town – the cave under the
main inn.  The manger for the feeding of animals in the winter would also be a clue that the site
was the only one where the two things would be likely to be found.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:13-14
    :bold:

The heavenly chorus of angels now join the angel in praises for God. "The multitude of the heavenly
host" probably means that the whole of the elect angels came together to sing the praises of God,
and glorify Him at the birth of the Saviour. This is seen in `Hebrews 1:6` which says, "When he
bringeth in the first begotten into the world, he saith, and let all the angels of God worship him".

**Glory to God in the highest,** - the glory of God is great in the salvation, peace, and
reconciliation of his people by Jesus Christ. The glory of God is His matchless character, the glory
of all his perfections and His wisdom in forming such a plan.  `Psalm 103:20-22, 6-17`.  `Psalm 103`
is interesting in this regard, as it records the dealing with sin and then the praise of the angels
– in Luke he sees that the order is reversed.  The angels praise God as if the work of the Messiah
is already accomplished, so certain is the Plan of complete fulfilment.  We need to remember the
certainty of victory.

**And on earth peace**: does not mean international peace, which will be the case when the Prince of
Peace reigns on this earth during the Millennium. What is meant is the peace that this child will
bring eventually at the Cross where God and man are reconciled.  Reconciliation can only come
through the work of the Lord on the Cross – through his hypostatic union he achieves victory in the
battle that Adam lost.

Christ only is their peace maker. He is unique being God and man in one person forever, and so
qualified as a mediator in things relating to God, and to make reconciliation for the sins of the
people

Application
...........

The time in the year at which Christ was born has been considered of great importance to many
Christians. However, the matter has been considered of no importance by the Holy Spirit who inspired
the writers of the Scripture. It is therefore concluded that we should concentrate on what the Holy
Spirit through the Scriptures wants us to understand.

However erroneous the customs infiltrating the two main festivals of the Christian Church might be,
Christmas and Easter should be noted for what they were; steps in the victory over sin and death.

Do we have real joy when we see the Lord’s plan as described in the Scriptures being worked out in
our individual lives? Do we know the will of God for us as individuals?

God is in ultimate control and His plan will be completed exactly according to His timetable.

It is by humility that Christ came to reign; and this is the only way into his kingdom. Pride is the
character of all unsaved men, humility the mark of the Son of God, and should be to all of His
followers. Christ came in the way of humility to destroy that pride which is the root of evil in the
souls of men.

You have to have the peace with God before you can have the peace of God, which passes all
understanding.  `Philippians 4:7`.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTMAS:  BIRTH DATE OF CHRIST`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTMAS:  ORIGINS OF CHRISTMAS TRADITIONS`
- :doc:`doctrines/HARMONY`

Visit Of The Shepherds To Adore Christ
--------------------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:15-20
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:15
    :bold:

The Imperfect Active Indicative of the word to speak “epo” shows that the shepherds constantly
talked to one another about what they had seen.  When a unique event occurs there is shock and then
desperate discussion to work out what to do next.  As a result they decided to go to confirm what
had happened and head for the one place where the answer could be given to them.

These shepherds were waiting for the coming of the Messiah;  they were believers and they understood
the Word of God and realized that the coming of Messiah was near. As soon as they had heard about
His arrival from the angel, that he had actually appeared on the earth, they went to find him.

The word “ginomai” translated come to pass is the word meaning to become something. It is a perfect
active participle, the perfect tense showing that it has happened but has everlasting effect in the
future.  All could have read `Daniel 9` and yet few bothered to believe that things could alter with
Messiah coming.

The shepherds recognise that it is the Lord God who has given them the message through the angel. We
see others who were told, for example King Herod, who did not go, The Wise Men who did, the court
advisors who knew where the Messiah was to be born, but were not interested enough to check it out,
or simply did not believe. Different groups given the same message and yet such different responses
to the same information.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:16
    :bold:

In this verse we see them acting on the message, and they do not hesitate once they know what must
be done. They made a top priority of hurrying to the place where the angel had said they would find
the Messiah.

In the Greek the Aorist Active Participle for making haste precedes the Aorist Active Indicative of
the point in time when they found the Messiah with Mary and Joseph just as the angel had described
it.

We should be surprised at the prompt obedience to the heavenly vision displayed by the shepherds
whose whole life revolved about protecting their sheep from wolves and bandits. We see in them no
doubts, or questionings, or hesitations.  They may have taken precautions with their flocks, and
someone may have stayed back and guarded them, but the majority of them headed straight to the place
where they had been told that the baby Jesus was.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:17
    :bold:

They satisfied themselves of the truth of the coming of the Messiah. They confirmed the message
given to them by the angels. Having seen the child themselves, they had now evidence that would
satisfy others; and accordingly they became the first preachers of the “gospel”, and they went and
proclaimed to others that the Messiah had come.

One of the first duties of those who are newly converted to God is to proclaim to others what they
have seen and felt. It should be done in a proper way and at the proper time; but nothing can or
should prevent a recently converted Christian from telling his friends, parents and speaking to old
companions.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:18
    :bold:

The word wondered in the Greek is “thaumazo”, which means to wonder, marvel, be tremendously
surprised. The Messiah born in a cave of very poor parents, surely not!  But these shepherds were
simple honest reliable folk. The heard the story from them, they were awaiting the Messiah but was
this the answer?

How was it, they wondered that the news had been given to these low class shepherds, and not to the
religious leaders of Israel?   However these shepherds are transformed by the news, as men changed
and enthusiastic about a story which they could never make up.  It was a dramatic witness to those
who heard the shepherd’s story.

A very similar response occurred at the time when Christ was reading the Scriptures in the synagogue
in `Luke 4`. The reaction in verse 22 was, “And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious
words which proceeded out of his mouth. And they said, “Is not this Joseph's son?”  People knew that
there was something quite different here, but in bafflement there is often confusion.  The big
challenge in this life is to understand that when God speaks He requires a response of us and a 100%
response, not any half hearted stumble.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:19
    :bold:

Mary also heard the story of the shepherds regarding their encounter with the angels. The Greek word
translated to ponder is “sumballo”, which means “together [sum] throw [ballo]”, or compare one thing
with another. Here we see the word heart as the thinking part of the mind.

Mary compared their story with her own in her mind; she compared what the shepherds had said with
what had been said to herself by the angel, and also by her husband, as well as what was said by
Elisabeth at the time she made her a visit.

She however said nothing of these things to others, lest she could be accused of boasting and
therefore left things to be discussed in the future.  There is a time to speak and time to ponder,
and just “sit with” the things that have been seen and heard.  It will take time for Mary to work
all things out and feel relaxed with the truth about what is ahead for her and her son.  She will
still be working it out at the foot of his Cross, and only on Resurrection morning will she fully
comprehend what has happened to them all through his presence amongst them.  `Proverbs 4:4`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:20
    :bold:

The shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God. These simple men, having confirmed the angel’s
story returned to the care of their flocks, glorifying God for what He had shown them, and for the
blessedness and honour which they felt.

They had as a result become servants of God of encouraging the same faith in their hearers.

Application
...........

All people should without delay seek the Saviour. When told of Him by the servants of God, they
should, like these shepherds, forsake all, and give no rest to their eyes until they have found him.

We may “always” find him. We need not travel to Bethlehem. We have only to believe on him and we
shall find him ever near to us, and forever our Saviour and friend.

When the Lord clearly guide us we should make all haste to do His will and share what He teaches us
with others so that we point not to ourselves, but as ambassadors to the Lord Jesus Christ.  `2
Corinthians 5:20-21`.

Often more good may be done by a young believer who has been converted recently encouraging people
who knew them prior to conversion than during any other period of their life.

Do we have the desire to tell others about our Lord. Paul had a deep desire to do so as seen in
`Romans 1:14-16`.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  AMBASSADOR`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  EVANGELISM`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  EVANGELISM - NEW TESTAMENT PATTERN`

Circumcision Of Jesus
---------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:21
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................









Application
...........

We are to understand the Christian way of life as delineated in the pertinent sections of the
Scriptures and apply them to our daily living.  Certain things are done as signs of what we believe,
and they are right and proper, even though not spiritual in themselves, they speak of spiritual
truth.  The circumcision of John and Jesus spoke of their identification with the destiny of their
human people, Israel, as God’s set apart people.

We have to realise that we are not under the Mosaic Law but under The Grace Covenant established at
the Cross. There are however a number of criteria we are to follow, such as the commandments in
`Acts 15:28-29, 1 Thessalonians 5:11-24`.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/CIRCUMCISION – SEE PAGE 41`

Presentation In The Temple
--------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:22-24
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:22
    :bold:

There is a two fold purpose for the ceremony here, the purification of the mother and the redemption
of Jesus as the firstborn as seen in verse 24. A mother was considered unclean having given birth to
a child, a period of 40 days for a male child, and 80 days for a female. This shows that this event
occurred when Jesus was 40 days old. `Exodus 13:1-15, Leviticus 12:1-12`.

As Lightfoot notes for the Talmudic Laws and Rabbinic records. “For the first seven first days after
she gave birth a mother was ceremonially unclean. She  then continued thirty three days in the blood
of her purifying, which made forty.  Although the time of her purifying was upon the fortieth day,
yet it was not till the day following that she came to the temple with her offering as explained in
the following, ‘a new mother does not bring her offering on the fortieth day for a male, nor on the
eightieth day for a female, but after her sun is set: and she brings her offering on the morrow,
which is the forty first for a male, and the eighty first for a female”.

And this was the time when they, Joseph and Mary, brought him, the child Jesus, to Jerusalem, and to
the temple there, to present him to the Lord, to the priest his representative.   This was done
inside the eastern gate, called the Nicanor Gate, for here, "they made women, suspected of adultery,
to drink, and purified new mothers, and cleansed the lepers”.

The woman to be purified was placed just inside the east gate of the court, and it was there that
she was sprinkled with blood: thus she received the atonement spoken of at the altar.   The blood of
the animals speaking of what the Lord Jesus would do as the firstborn of all creation.  `Romans
8:28-39, Colossians 1:15-18`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:23
    :bold:

The verse that Luke is quoting is `Exodus 13:2` – **“Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, whatsoever
openeth the womb among the children of Israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine.”**

The firstborn son was devoted and consecrated to God, and so had to be redeemed for holy service, or
a price paid in their place for the priest who would stand for them. The reason of this law was that
when God smote all the firstborn of Egypt, he saved the firstborn of Israel, and therefore claimed a
right to them, and obliged their parents, exempting the Levites, to redeem them at the price of five
shekels, which was then given to the Levites to serve at the altar on behalf of the nation.

Under this law our Lord was acknowledged as Mary’s firstborn, and as such one holy to the Lord.  A
sum of money was now paid for his redemption, He who was the great Redeemer of his people.

Now as the tribe of Levi was exempt from this law.  It is a clear case, that Mary, though related to
Elisabeth, was not of the tribe of Levi, otherwise her firstborn would not have been subject to it.
"An Israelite that comes from a priestess, or from a she Levite, is free, (i.e. from the redemption
of the firstborn;) for the thing does not depend on the father, but on the mother, as it is said,
that openeth the womb in Israel.”

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:24
    :bold:

Jesus is the firstborn. The fact that they offered a pair of turtle doves and two young pigeons show
that they were a poverty stricken family, as such a sacrifice was allowed under the law only if you
could not bring the normal sacrifice. If the person was able, she was to bring a lamb of the first
year for a burnt offering; and a young pigeon, or a turtle dove, for a sin offering; but in case of
poverty, then the above sacrifice was allowed with one of them for a burnt offering, and the other
for a sin offering.

The fact that they were a poor family conforms with `Isaiah 11:1`, where the former mighty line of
David would be cut down and left as a stump from which the Messiah would come.  The creator of the
universe gave up the vastness of power and wealth to become poor, that by his work we might become
rich in spiritual places. `2 Corinthians 8:9, Ephesians 1:3`.

Application
...........

We have the Scriptures to follow as our sole guide for this life, and as sons of God we are to obey
them. It is only as we obey him that we are able to be used by Him for His plan and purposes.

We are not under the Mosaic Law, but we are under the higher law of grace. This allows us great
freedom as well as giving us great responsibility.

Jesus Christ was not brought up in a rich family. His family was amongst the poorest in the nation.
God often does things in unexpected ways and uses the most unlikely people.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/OFFERINGS:  LEVITICAL OFFERINGS REPRESENT CHRIST`

Prophecy Of Simeon
------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:25-35
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:25
    :bold:

Many have thought, that this was Rabban Simeon, the son of Hillell, who was president of the
Sanhedrim forty years, and shoe son was Gamaliel, the teacher of the Apostle Paul. We cannot
speculate upon this, for there is no certainty of this.  Whatever his family origins, this Simeon
was definitely a member of a believing remnant. He was a righteous and devout man and looking for
the Messiah of Israel and one of the few people being guided and empowered by the Holy Spirit.  He
with the prophetess Anna were expecting the Messiah to come, as they had the knowledge of the timing
of his arrival form the prophet Daniel.  `Daniel 9:24-27`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:26
    :bold:

In this verse we have two verbs translated “to see”. It is noted that in the Greek it is the second
verb which is in the subjunctive mood. From the English it would appear that it was the first use of
that verb that should be in the subjunctive. In the Greek it says literally “…not to see death
before he should see the Christ of the Lord”, rather than, “that he should not see death, before he
had seen the Lord's Messiah/Christ”.

The Holy Spirit had revealed to him that he would not die until he had seen the Messiah. In this
verse we see “the Lord’s Christ” which could be translated, “God’s Appointed or Sent One”, ie the
Messiah.  `Psalm 25:14,89:46-49`.

We see different ways in which God revealed truths to men. It was not in a dream, as the wise men
were warned, nor by an angel, as Joseph, nor by a voice from heaven, but by the inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, enlightening his understanding, and impressing into his soul that he would see Messiah
before he died.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:27
    :bold:

At the right time on the right day he is moved by the Holy Spirit to enter the temple and destiny is
fulfilled.  Guided by the Holy Spirit he meets the baby Jesus, Joseph and Mary, in the Temple Courts
at the very time of the presentation of the child.  This is a wonderful example of “walking in the
filling of the Holy Spirit” in Old Testament times.  `Ephesians 5:18`.   It is the example for us
all, to be sensitive to the inner urging of the Holy Spirit, to meet the right people at the right
time and minister the right spiritual message.

Probably Simeon had in view the prophecy of `Malachi 3:1`, “The Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly
come to his temple”. In this messenger of the covenant, the soul of Simeon delighted. `Psalm 32:11,
33:1-4`.

Now the prophecy was just going to be fulfilled; and the Holy Spirit, who dwelt with this righteous
man, directed him to go and see its fulfilment as far as he was concerned.  After the custom of the
law means to present him to the Lord, and then redeem him by paying five shekels, and to offer those
sacrifices appointed by the law.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:28
    :bold:

Simeon recognises the Christ child as the Messiah through the inner ministry of the Holy Spirit and
praises God. In the Hebrew the meaning of the word Joshua [Jesus in the Greek] is salvation.  He
sees that this baby is to grow to become the Saviour of his people.  `Psalm 105:1-3, 135:19-20`.

The utterances of Elizabeth, Mary, and Simeon are consecutive. Each begins where the other ends.
Mary sings her own born Messiah; Zechariah celebrates the triumph of Israel, and Simeon announces
the hope of the Jewish people and the Gentiles. But, besides this holding forth of the Messiah as a
Saviour for Gentile as well as Jew, what is remarkable is, that he announces in Jesus a suffering
Messiah as well as a glorious King.  `Isaiah 53:1`ff.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:29
    :bold:

It was promised to Simeon that he should not die till he had seen the Lord’s anointed. Now, having
seen him, he expects to be immediately dismissed in peace into the eternal world; having a full
assurance and enjoyment of the salvation of God. `Psalm 37:37-40, Isaiah 57:1-2`.

Though Simeon means his death, yet the thing itself is not mentioned, for death has not only lost
its sting, but its name also, to all those who have, even by faith, seen the Lord’s anointed.
`Psalm 68:20, 116:15`. This man dies at peace in the fulfillment of the Plan of God.  He doesn't
need to see the end, for he has seen the beginning and he knows, by faith, that all will be
accomplished.  He has Abrahamic faith.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:30
    :bold:

The Messiah, who is often so called, goes by the name of "salvation", because the salvation of God's
elect is put into his hands. He has done the work for our salvation, and he is the author of it, and
he has fulfilled his work and completed what he promised to do.  `2 Samuel 23:1-7, Isaiah 49:1-6,
52:10`.

Old Simeon now saw, with his bodily eyes, a sight which many kings and prophets had desired. He not
only saw the physical child but also saw with the eyes of his understanding, with the spiritual eye
of faith, that this child was his Saviour and Redeemer.  Like Daniel he saw the future and glimpsed
the eternal reality of what Jesus would achieve.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:31
    :bold:

Here salvation is represented under the concept of a feast, which God himself has provided for the
whole world. Everybody is invited to come to the feast. He has invited all the nations of the earth.
`Psalm 23:1-6, 96:1-3, 10-13`.

Simeon in the Temple, the most sacred location for the Jews was not meaning the congregation of
Israel, that looked for redemption in Jerusalem and who were now together with Simeon and Anna, nor
the body of the Jewish nation only, to whom he ministered but both Jews and Gentiles.  `Isaiah
42:1-9, 45:17-25, 62:1-3`.

God provided a Saviour who was to be lifted up on the cross, as the serpent was lifted up by Moses
in the wilderness, to draw all men to him, to be the object of faith and hope to look to for life
and salvation. `John 3:3-18`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:32
    :bold:

The Gentiles are represented as sitting in darkness that is, in ignorance and sin. Christ is a
“light” to them, as by him they will be made acquainted with the character of the true God, his law,
and the plan of redemption. As the darkness rolls away when the sun arises, so ignorance and error
flee away when Jesus gives light to the mind.Israel had been given all the prophecies of the coming
Messiah. They had the responsibility of keeping the Scriptures of the Lord.  Christ came to fulfil
many of the prophecies at His first advent. He came unto his own but his own received him not.
`Isaiah 9:2, 42:6-7, 49:6, 60:1-3`.  The story does not end with the rejection of the Lord at his
First Advent.  The nation Israel will yet be blessed beyond measure through their future acceptance
of Him as their saviour.  `Psalm 85:9, Isaiah 4:2-4, 45:22-25, 60:19, Zechariah 12:10`ff, `Romans
11:1-29`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:33
    :bold:

Notice here that it is Joseph and his mother reinforcing that Joseph was not His physical father.

Why one wonders did Joseph and his mother marvel at Simeon’s words?  After all they had heard from
Gabriel, Elisabeth, and the Shepherds. Simeon’s prophecy had gone beyond the angel’s outline and it
may have been surprising that he should know anything about the child’s destiny that the angel had
not made known.

We should bear in mind that every parent is astonished and pleased at the fine things others see in
the child. It is a mark of unusual insight for others to see so much that is obvious or known to the
parent.  They were staggered at the things that were unfolding before them. It also confirmed and
reinforced the truth of who the baby was, Immanuel, “God with us”.  No matter how many times they
were told the truth about this baby it was still awesome and overwhelming.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:34
    :bold:

Christ brought downfall to the hopes of those who expected a revolutionary fighter like the
Maccabees to throw off the Roman yoke and bring in a political kingdom, but such a temporal and
power based kingdom would not be the biblical millennium. He brought ruin to those whose desire for
the kingdom of God was due to personal ambition for place and power in it.  However He brought
rising to those who were willing that God should overthrow all their plans and ambitions, and who
accepted from him the grander gift of an eternal kingdom, prepared for all people who would enter it
by faith, through his grace.   He will be a stone of offence to many.   `Isaiah 8:14-15, Hosea
14:9`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:35
    :bold:

In the phrase, “A sword shall pierce through thine own soul”, Simeon announces to Mary that the
mother who sang the Magnificat would also be a sorrowing mother standing at the Cross in utter
sadness and total grief. Though she was exulted in the thought that her son being the Messiah would
sit on the throne of David, she learns now that the a sword shall pierce her soul; that the Cross
must come and be accepted before the Crown is received. `Psalm 22:6-18, 69:9-12`.

Men's views and decisions regarding Christ are a mirror in which the very "thoughts of their hearts"
are seen.  In relationship to him is the destiny of all mankind determined.  He is the touchstone
for eternal life.  `Psalm 2:10-12, 42:10-11`.

Application
...........

Those who come, under the influence of God’s Spirit, to places of public worship, will undoubtedly
meet with him who is the comfort and salvation of Israel.

When we see the Lord through the Scriptures or dig up gems of truth from the Word of God we have a
sense of peace and comfort.

We may not see the physical baby or Christ in the flesh but we can and must see Him through the
Word.

We see that God has provided salvation and has offered it by grace to all. Whoever wants to come is
free to come.

The result of preaching Christ is always to awaken opposition or love and obedience.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/PROPHECY:  FULFILLED PROPHECY PROOF OF INSPIRATION`

Prophecy Of Anna
----------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:36-39
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:36
    :bold:

Anna may not have been a prophetess in the strict sense of the word, i.e. one who could foretell
future events, but rather a holy woman, who, from her extensive knowledge and deep experience in
Divine things, was capable of instructing others.  It is a wider view of the role and office of
“prophet” than we are sometimes used to, but may be in view here.  It may equally well be true that
this woman was a “foreteller” of truth, as well as a “forth-teller” of truth.

This concept is given in the use of the word prophet in `1 Corinthians 14:3` which says,  **“He that
prophesieth, speaketh unto men to edification, and to exhortation, and to comfort”.  **So here we
find Anna proclaiming Jesus to all who looked for redemption in Jerusalem.

She was of the tribe of Asher, one of the so called ten lost tribes. This was one of the ten tribes
of the kingdom of Israel, several families of which had returned from their idolatry towards God in
the time that Hezekiah proclaimed the Passover in Jerusalem. `2 Chronicles 30:1-11`.  There are no
ten lost tribes – that is an erroneous interpretation of events around the years 750-720 BC when the
Northern Kingdom was destroyed by the Assyrians.  Most of the godly remnant of the North fled south
well before the Assyrians surrounded Samaria and too her people into captivity.  A remnant of all
the tribes were saved within Judah in the south.  `James 1:1`.

Though her family might have been a distinguished one in Jerusalem we find that it was her very
exemplary life that entitled her to be mentioned in such a way by the Lord in history.  She was
morally pure when married, but was only married for seven years, before her husband died, and was
now as a widow eighty-four years of age.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:37
    :bold:

At the age of eighty four it is likely she had retired from physical work but her spirit continued
still to burn with a steady and undiminished flame.  She attended constantly at the hours of prayer,
which were nine in the morning and three in the afternoon. She accompanied her devotion with
frequent periods of fasting. These periods were probably not more often than twice in the week which
was the custom of the most rigid Pharisees [`Luke 18:12`].  This woman became an model for devotion
of the orders that later became the “nuns” of the early church, that gave themselves over to fasting
and prayer daily.  They lived on the food they were given and spent all their time in prayer.  `1
Timothy 5:3-16`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:38
    :bold:

Just as Simeon was embracing the Christ child in his arms, and blessing God for him, and saying the
things concerning him, Anna arrived and also started to give thanks to the God for the Messiah.

She praised God that she was seeing and holding the long looked for Messiah and Saviour, and that
she had lived to see his blessed face and bless his parents.   She has, like Simeon walked in the
filling of the Holy Spirit and been guided into the temple at exactly the right time to meet the
child.

It was clear to the believing Jews that the 70 weeks of Daniel’s prophecy was nearing fulfillment so
many Jews were expecting the arrival of the promised Messiah. The Messiah was going to come into
Jerusalem and specifically the Temple and there was an excitement amongst those who believed the
Word of God, for they knew it was “any day now”.

It is not clear whether Anna, who until this time had kept herself confined to the temple now
ventured out into Jerusalem giving the people the good news of the arrival of the Messiah or whether
she remained in the Temple to witness to those who were looking for redemption in Jerusalem.  It is
however clear that she witnessed to the fact of the presence of the Messiah in Jerusalem to any who
was willing to hear.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:39
    :bold:

“When they had performed all things”, relates to the purification of Mary and the presentation and
redemption of her firstborn together with the relevant sacrifices and ceremonies. After they had
conformed to the requirements of the law of the Lord they returned into the Galilee, but they will
not stay there long.  There is great rejection of Mary’s story and great insult and sadness behind
the scenes here, and within a few months the couple and their child head back to Bethlehem possibly
because of contacts there for Joseph to work.  This was a time of great upheaval and violence in the
years before and then after Herod’s death.

They are next seen in Bethlehem, where the wise men found them within the next two years, living in
a house.

Application
...........

It is a great honour to have one’s name written in the Scriptures as Anna did but to be written in
the book of life is of infinitely greater importance.

A simple devoted life of an ordinary Christian has tremendous impact on those with whom they come in
contact.

Anna after the sadness of a very short married life was able to use the years granted to her for the
glory of God.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/PRAYER`
- :doc:`doctrines/FASTING`

Life Of Jesus At Nazareth
-------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:40-52
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:40
    :bold:

Here we see the child grew which is the Imperfect Active Indicative of “auxano” which means he kept
on growing physically. This child grew and waxed strong which is the Imperfect Middle Indicative of
“ekrataiouto”.

Both verbs are also used in Luke1:80 of the growth of John the Baptist as a child.  Luke however now
uses the word pneuma, in spirit. Here in addition to the bodily development Luke has “filled with
wisdom”. The Present Passive Participle shows that the process of filling with wisdom kept pace with
the bodily growth. `Isaiah 11:1-5, 53:1-2, John 1:14`.

We need not be confused over this growth in wisdom on the part of Jesus any more than over his
bodily growth. “The intellectual, moral, and spiritual growth of the child, like the physical, was
real. His was a perfect humanity developing perfectly, unimpeded any defects. It was the first
instance of such a growth in history. For the first time a human infant was realizing the ideal of
humanity”. `Psalm 45:1-2`.

We also note that the grace of God was upon Him in full measure.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:41
    :bold:

Here we see that it was an annual pilgrimage for Mary and Joseph to go up to Jerusalem each year.
Bethlehem is a short distance from Jerusalem, and perhaps they stayed there during the Passover
times, so travels back from Bethlehem/Jerusalem to Nazareth were common for this couple. The events
of verses 41 to 50 cover a period of seven days. The festival in verse 43 is two days in length,
they went on a day’s journey in verse 44 and spent a fourth day returning to Jerusalem in verse 45
before searching for him for three days in verse 46.

Every male Jew was originally expected to appear at the Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles as seen
in `Exodus 23:14-17`. “**Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year. 15  Thou shalt
keep the feast of unleavened bread: (thou shalt eat unleavened bread seven days, as I commanded
thee, in the time appointed of the month Abib; for in it thou camest out from Egypt: and none shall
appear before me empty:) 16  And the feast of harvest, the firstfruits of thy labours, which thou
hast sown in the field: and the feast of ingathering, ****which is**** in the end of the year, when
thou hast gathered in thy labours out of the field. 17  Three times in the year all thy males shall
appear before the Lord GOD”**.

There was no requirement for Mary to go to Jerusalem at that time as the command was for the males
to go but she accompanied Joseph.

It is also noted that it was during a later feast of Passover that the armed guard would seek out
the Lord Jesus Christ in Gethsemane among the many people camped around Jerusalem for this festival
so the number of pious Jews who made the journey was quite large significantly increasing the
population of Jerusalem.  Josephus records that up to two million visitors could attend these great
feasts.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:42
    :bold:

Here not only Joseph and Mary go to Jerusalem, but at twelve years of age they took Jesus with them.
This is not the bar-mitzvah of Jesus which would occur at the age of 13. It was at the age of 13
that the Jewish boy would come under the Law and thus responsible for his own sins. Up to that age
the parents are responsible for the child’s sins.

In keeping with Jewish tradition the son was taken to Jerusalem on the Passover following his 12th
birthday in preparation of his bar-mitzvah which would come at the age of 13.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:43-45
    :bold:

It should be noted that the parents in verse 41 here are stated as Joseph and his mother again
indicating that Joseph was his legal but not physical father and that Mary was the mother of the
humanity of Christ. They now leave to return to Nazareth.

They are traveling with a party or relatives and neighbours and when the party left Jerusalem Joseph
and Mary assumed that the 12 year old was with the group but He had stayed behind in Jerusalem.
Community care for all young people was common in this culture, so we don't have careless parents
here.  The boys would all be together and they would look out for each other, and it would only be
on the night at the first encampment that they would have searched.

On making the first night’s encampment Mary and Joseph go and seek out Jesus, but having searched
diligently they find to their dismay that he is not with the group. They therefore leave the group
and return to Jerusalem to seek out the 12 year old boy.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:46
    :bold:

Even after returning to Jerusalem it took them three anxious and fear and prayer filled days before
they found Jesus in the Temple among the great teachers, interpreters and experts in the Mosaic Law.
He was there listening to them and asking them questions. This showed that he understood what they
were saying and he was asking penetrating questions which went far deeper than one would expect of a
boy of those years.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:47
    :bold:

The top theologians in Jerusalem were amazed at his questions and understanding. The Greek word for
astonished is “Existemi” which is in the Imperfect tense which means they kept on being amazed.
`Psalm 119:97-104`.

Their amazement was amplified by the fact that he came from Nazareth of Galilee which at that time
was certainly not known as a centre of academic excellence as seen in `John 1:45- 46`, “Philip
findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the
prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph. 46  And Nathanael said unto him, Can
there any good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip saith unto him, Come and see.”

Evidence of the source of His wisdom is given from the prophecy of the coming Messiah. There are
several servant of Jehovah songs in the last portion of Isaiah. In this case how the child was
taught is shown in `Isaiah 50:4-5`, “4  The Lord GOD hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I
should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he wakeneth morning by morning, he
wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned.  5 The Lord God hath opened mine ear, and I was not
rebellious, neither turned away back.”

Here even though Jesus was brought up by fine believing parents, God the Father taught Him morning
by morning. Christ’s deity did not have to learn but the child did, just like every other human
being. Unlike other humans however He was not rebellious and was always attentive. Later in `Isaiah
50` it is clear that one of the things He learnt in the early morning teaching sessions was that He
was the Messiah and would suffer for others.

The leaders of Israel therefore had ample reason to be constantly amazed by the young Messiah

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:48
    :bold:

When Joseph and Mary saw him among the doctors they were astonished that he was allowed as a young
boy to sit with them and that He was held in such esteem by them.

His mother who had been looking for Him for three days asked Jesus why He had stayed behind? She did
so with apparent mildness which should be an example to parents who should not provoke their
children to anger, but deal gently and tenderly with them.  `Ephesians 6:1-4`.  She is deeply upset
however, and they have been grieving for his apparent loss – for this was a day when kidnappers
would collect children off the streets and sell them into slavery – their imagination and fears must
have been running riot by this day.

Mary calls Joseph his father, though she knew he was not, in a physical sense. However because he
was his father by the law of marriage; and especially because of his paternal care of him in his
education, and bringing him up he was classified as his father as it is a Jewish tradition that "not
he that begets, but he that brings up”, is the father.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:49
    :bold:

The first words of our Lord preserved in the Bible expresses the boy’s amazement that his parents
should not know that there was only one possible place in Jerusalem for him. They had sought Him
three days with the imperfect tense of “Zeteo” indicating that they were constantly searching for
Him.  We can see them heading around all the camp sites asking all the relatives still encamped to
check their tents.  They have visited every relative and contact, but to no avail.  They have gone
through all their human relatives – but hadn’t through about the temple until the end.

When the boy Jesus first became conscious of his peculiar relation to the Father in heaven we do not
know. It is clear that at this point, at the age of twelve, he has it, and it will grow within him
through the years ahead in Nazareth.

He therefore says that, “He must be about”, or literally, “in my Father’s business”. It should be
noted that it is in “my Father”, not in “our” Father’s business, again showing His unique
relationship with God.  `Psalm 40:8, Malachi 3:1`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:50
    :bold:

Probably Jesus had never expressly said this before this point about his mission, and so they were
confused even though they would have seen and heard many things from Him at home. Even though they
had heard the angels words, they were the parents who cared for him through an otherwise uneventful
childhood, and it is easy for the great words to drift into the mists of past time and to think that
all will be normal, and then just become wonderful one day.  It is psychologically normal to expect
the best and not want to dwell on bad news.

From this time we have no more mention of Joseph. The next we hear is of his "mother and brethren"
in `John 2:12`. It is therefore concluded that between His appearance in the Temple and the
commencement of our Lord's public life, Joseph had died. There is great sadness in this family, and
grief was a thing with which Jesus was well acquainted.  `Isaiah 53:3`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:51
    :bold:

Here we see that subjection does not mean inferiority on the part of the person who is subject to
another. Here the superior God – man Jesus Christ, is subject to two inferior sinful people, in the
form of Mary and Joseph. It was however complying with a chain of command which God had set up in
the institution of family.  The Lord mentors the right relationship within the family of respect and
love towards each other – a mutual submission that opens the door to all fellowship in the Holy
Spirit.  `Ephesians 5:18-29`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 2:52
    :bold:

This verse tells us that he developed in four areas.

Developed in wisdom – intellectual development.

Developed in stature – physical development.

Developed in favour with God – spiritual development.

Developed in favour with man – social development.

Application
...........

How greatly we should appreciate the Lord Jesus Christ who was given to the human race as God’s
solution to man’s problem.

We have to understand what the Lord’s will is for our life and ensure that we put God’s work as the
prime focus of our life.

We however must not neglect our responsibilities to the family as Scriptures say that a person who
does that is worse than an infidel.

Just because a person is subject to another it does not mean that the person in subjection is
inferior.

When the Bible talks about the wife being subject to her husband it does not imply that the wife is
inferior to the husband; it is an equal being subject to another equal in conformity with God’s
teaching on authority.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/FEASTS OF ISRAEL`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  OBEDIENCE`
- :doc:`doctrines/GOD:  DIVINE INSTITUTIONS – FAMILY`

