Chapter 5
=========

Call Of Simon, Andrew, James And John
-------------------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:1-11
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:1-2
    :bold:

Here we see the keenness of the people coming to hear the great teacher at the Lake of
Galilee/Gennesaret.  The crowd is large and pressing forward to hear his words.  There is a real
“crush” of people, and the Lord sees the two fishing boats and heads towards them, the large crowd
following.  It is noted that Luke correctly calls it a lake rather than a sea which is the word used
by Matthew and Mark, and uses a term that transliterates it into the Greek and was its common
Gentile name at this time.  John will refer to its Roman name, the Sea of Tiberias, the name common
after the defeat of the Jewish Rebellion in 70 AD.

Luke in his Gospel and the book of Acts uses five verbs for washing: this one “apopluno” for
cleaning the nets, apomasso for wiping the dust from one’s feet in `Luke 10:11`, ekmasso of the
sinful woman wiping Christ’s feet with her hair, `Luke 7:38, 44`, apolouo of washing away sins as in
`Acts 22:16`, and louo of washing the body of Dorcas `Acts 9:37` and the wounds of the prisoners,
`Acts 16:33`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:3
    :bold:

In verse two Luke has pointed out that the two boats were “standing by” the shore, a nautical term
describing their readiness for setting sail, close to shore. In this verse the Greek shows that
after he embarked on one of the boast, he asked that the boat, which had been there at readiness for
sailing for a long time, be moved a little further offshore. He then sat down and kept on teaching
the crowd from Peter’s boat.

As Plummer remarks, “Christ uses Peter’s boat as a pulpit whence to throw the net of the Gospel over
His hearers”.  He uses the natural acoustics of the voice being amplified over still water, and so
thousands on the raised shore could hear his words easily.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:4-5
    :bold:

After He had finished His address He spoke to Peter who was captain/owner of the boat that He had
been using, and commanded him [second person singular] to launch out into the deep, or go further
offshore. However when Jesus Christ orders the nets to be let down, it is in the second person
plural, and is therefore talking to the whole crew.

Peter was startled at this command, as they had worked all night and had not caught a thing except
the sea grass that they were frustratingly washing out of their nets when Jesus arrived. He
addressed Jesus as “Master” or Rabbi. Only Luke uses this in relation to Christ [ `Luke 8:24, 45,
9:33, 49, 17:13`]. It was used in the ancient world for an overseer and indicates that Peter
acknowledged Jesus Christ’s authority as a teacher he respects at this point.

By using this word Peter is implying that he recognises the authority of the Lord as a teacher, but
in this particular case is very sceptical as to His fishing order, as Peter considers, as a
professional fisherman, that he would have more knowledge than the Lord, and actually “knows best”
about the hopeless state of the water and the impossibility of catching fish when the sea grass is
moving in great clouds across the lake bottom.

Peter says that they had grown weary in toil. It used to be said that the notion of weariness in
toil appears only in the Septuagint and New Testament, but archaeological finds now give examples
from inscriptions on tombstones quite in harmony with the use in the New Testament.  It is hard work
drawing a net, and especially if there is sea weed or sea grass getting caught in it, but no fish.
Grass and weed in the net adds significantly to the weight of the net and makes it heavy, and the
lack of fish in such conditions makes it frustrating, and most after one net full of weed give up
and head home.  These men are tenacious and have worked hard all night, but caught nothing.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:6
    :bold:

The phrase “their net brake” in the Greek actually means that the net was “about to break” or filled
with fish to breaking point.  If their nets had actually “broken,” as our English word seems to
suppose, the fish would have obviously escaped. Reading on in the next couple of verses clearly
shows that this did not happen.  The catch is the greatest they have ever or will ever catch in
their lives.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:7
    :bold:

These four disciples were all fishermen and were partners in the two boats. As they had gone out
into the deep they beckoned their partners, they gave signs perhaps because they could not be easily
heard.  The other two men quickly row or sail out to them and working together they sling the net
between the two boats to secure it and the catch, taking all the fish into both boats to the point
where there is not much sea board and both are in danger of sinking under the weight of fish and
men.

Dr. Thomson in his publication “The Land and the Book”, describes such events as happened above in
the following way “Again, there is the bag-net and basket-net, of various kinds, which are so
constructed and worked as to enclose the fish out in deep water. I have seen them of almost every
conceivable size and pattern. It was with some one of this sort, I suppose, that Simon had toiled
all night without catching anything, but which, when let down at the command of Jesus, enclosed so
great a multitude that the net broke, and they filled two ships with the fish until they began to
sink”.

“Peter here speaks of toiling all night; and there are certain kinds of fishing always carried on at
night. It is a beautiful sight. With blazing torch the boat glides over the flashing sea, and the
men stand gazing keenly into it until their prey is sighted, when, quick as lightning, they fling
their net or fly their spear. Often you see the tired fishermen come sullenly into harbour in the
morning, having toiled all night in vain. Indeed, every kind of fishing is uncertain. A dozen times
the angler jerks out a naked hook; the hand-net closes down on nothing; the drag-net brings in only
weeds; the bag comes up empty. And then again, every throw is successful - every net is full; and
frequently without any other apparent reason than that of throwing it on the right side of the ship
instead of the left, as it happened to the disciples here at Tiberias.”

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:8-11
    :bold:

When Peter saw what had happened he fell down in front of Jesus in amazement, wonder, and gratitude
recognising without doubt the superiority of the Lord Jesus Christ in all things, even fishing!
Given his previous unspoken thoughts about the Lord pretending to be a fisherman – he confesses his
sinful thoughts about the Lord to the Lord.  He had doubted the Lord and saw that whatever is not of
faith is truly sinful!  `Romans 14:23`.

Peter felt totally unworthy in the presence of the Lord whom he now saw as a holy and high being
sent from God. He asked Jesus to leave him and his boat, not realising that the person he was
talking to would never leave nor forsake him. `Matthew 28:20, Hebrews 13:5`.

In verse 10 Jesus promises them that they shall from now onwards “catch men”. The Greek word catch
is “zogreo” which means to catch alive, not to kill. So then Peter is to be a catcher of men, not of
fish, and to catch them alive and for life, not dead and for death.

He also tells Peter not to fear. The verb phobeo is in the present middle imperative, the middle
voice showing that Peter would benefit from not fearing – and he will only do that by trusting the
one who has called him and will keep him until the end.

The day of Pentecost will one day prove that Christ’s prophecy will come true. Much must happen
before that great day. But Jesus foresees the possibilities in Simon, and he joyfully undertakes the
task of making a fisher of men out of this poor fisher of fish.

In verse 11 they forsook all. It was not “much” that they left; a couple of small boats and their
nets; but it was all they had, even all their living. By this they showed their love of Jesus, and
their willingness to deny themselves and place their total trust in his ability to keep them and
guide them for the rest of their lives and forever.   `Matthew 11:28-30, 2 Timothy 2:12-13`.

Application
...........

You may meet the Lord and be impressed with Him, but it is the Lord who calls us to service, and it
is up to us to respond and be ready to leave all our previous hopes, dreams, plans and behaviours
behind and follow him into his path for our life.

To mature in the Christian life you must get your first priority right, and put the Lord first in
your scale of values.

Jesus Christ says that He will never leave you nor forsake you.

The Lord choses rather unusual, and often by worldly standards, unremarkable people to play
important roles in the outworking of the plan of God.

Disciples of the Lord should humble themselves inn the sight of the Lord so they may be exalted in
His own good time and in his particular way.

We “are” not worthy to be with him, to be reckoned among his friends, or to dwell in heaven with
him; but he came to seek the lost, and to save the impure.  We are accepted in the fellowship of the
beloved.

He graciously condescends to dwell with those who are humble and contrite, though they are conscious
that they are not worthy of his presence; and we may therefore come boldly to him, and ask him to
receive us to his home, to an eternal dwelling with him in the heavens.  `Hebrews 4:12-16`.

All that Jesus asks is that we should leave “all” we have for him; that we should love him “more”
than we do whatever friends or property we may possess, and be willing to give them all up when he
requires it.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  EVANGELISM see page 56`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  OBEDIENCE see page 76`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHURCH:  APOSTLESHIP`
- :doc:`doctrines/PETER - DIVINE GUIDANCE`
- :doc:`doctrines/JOHN THE DISCIPLE`

Cure Of A Leper
---------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:12-16
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:12
    :bold:

Here we again see Dr Luke as both Mark and Matthew simply state that this man was a leper. Evidently
this is a particularly bad case, full of sores, and far advanced as Luke the physician notes. The
law in `Leviticus 13:12, 13` curiously treated advanced cases as less unclean than the earlier
stages. `Leviticus 13:12`, “And if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy cover all
the skin of him that hath the plague from his head even to his foot, wheresoever the priest looketh;
13  Then the priest shall consider: and, behold, if the leprosy have covered all his flesh, he shall
pronounce him clean that hath the plague: it is all turned white: he is clean. 14  But when raw
flesh appeareth in him, he shall be unclean.”

In this passage also we note that the leper fell on his face, which is added to the fact that he was
on his knees in Mark, and worshipped the Lord in Matthew. The fact that all three synoptics give the
same conversation clearly indicates that all versions relate to the same incident, and most likely
that this man became a believer and was able to give added depth to Luke as he investigated the
facts while Paul was under arrest in Caesarea.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:13-14
    :bold:

This repeats the account in Matthew and Mark with the cleansing of the leper being a direct witness
to the priest that the Messiah was on earth.  Note in the previous verse, that the leper has no
doubts about the Lord’s ability to heal, he just wonders whether the Lord will want to heal him.
There is something in this man that makes him feel particularly unworthy of assistance.  The Lord’s
touch is especially significant given the man’s earlier statement.

A veil is drawn over whatever it is that afflicted this man’s spirit, as it is none of our business,
`John 21:20-23`, but the Lord gets him active immediately, to go and witness to the priesthood.
Messiah has come – this is Exhibit One!  Psychologically it is always important for those who low
self esteem, or some significant guilt, to be able to do something that reflects their new forgiven
and cleansed status publically – the Lord strengthens this man in his new life, by the witness he is
able to give openly that he is a cleansed and new man.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:15-16
    :bold:

Here again we see his fame spreading. From the Greek it is the word travelling. We often say that
both good and bad words “travel fast”. It certainly did in this case. So much so that the multitude
actively sought the Lord. We note that in the Greek the word to come is in the imperfect tense which
means that they kept on seeking or arriving in the Lord’s presence.

The more the crowds came as a result of the leper’s story, the more Jesus worked, but also the more
rigorously he stuck to his rest-recharge routine of private prayer time alone.  He regularly turned
away from the crowds to the desert regions and prayed with the Father. It is a picture of Jesus
drawn with vivid power, and it explains the source of his resilience under such public pressures.
The Lord mentors the only way to retain power in public ministry – and that is private times of
prayerfulness and reflection away from the crowds.

The wild enthusiasm of the crowds was running ahead of their comprehension of the true nature of
Christ and his mission and message.   They still have Second Advent Messianic expectations and over
time many will find their “love waxes cold” towards him, for he does not do what they want.
`Matthew 24:12`.

Application
...........

Truth is self verifying and though people may not like it they can never forget it.

The unbeliever needs to recognise that he has no claim on the Lord; that cleansing and salvation
depends on his sovereign will; and must cast himself at his feet with the feelings of the leper.

Happily, no one ever came to Jesus with this attitude has not been received and pardoned as it is
the will of God that none should perish. `2 Peter 3:9`.

We see that the miracles have a purpose to witness to Christ or later to the disciples.

Miracles stir up crowds but often their focus is on the miracle rather than the reason for it.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/MIRACLES:  PURPOSE   see page 7`
- :doc:`doctrines/MIRACLES OF CHRIST   see page 116`
- :doc:`doctrines/MIRACLES:  HEALING AND MIRACLES   see page 125`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHURCH:  WORSHIP AND PRAISE`

Healing Of A Paralytic
----------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:17-26
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:17
    :bold:

Here we see the Lord teaching in front of a very mixed group of people including Pharisees and
doctors of the law who were sometimes called Scribes, and sometimes lawyers, and were generally of
the sect of the Pharisees

“Doctors of the law” (nomodidaskaloi) is a compound word not found outside of the New Testament and
ecclesiastical writers. It appears here and in `Acts 5:34` and `1 Timothy 1:7`. It is not likely
that Luke and Paul made up the word, but they simply used the term already in current use to
describe teachers and interpreters of the law. Our word “doctor” is Latin for “teacher.”

The phrase “ out of every village of Galilee and Judea and Jerusalem” appears to have two geographic
locations and a city involved, that of Jerusalem. Alfred Edersheim in his book “Jewish Social Life”
observes that the Jews distinguished Jerusalem as a separate district in Judea.

We must remember that Jesus had already made one tour of Galilee, which had stirred the Pharisees
and rabbis to active opposition. Judea had already been aroused and Jerusalem was the headquarters
of the definite campaign now beginning to  be organized against Jesus. We note also that Jesus had
already left Jerusalem and Judea  [`John 4:1-4`] because of the jealousy of the Pharisees. They are
here on purpose to find fault and to make charges against Jesus that will end his influence and
power amongst the people. `Acts 4:29-31`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:18-20
    :bold:

We have seen before in Mark that four people brought the paralytic to Jesus in the hope that this
miracle worker could heal their friend.  Luke, being a doctor, uses a technical phrase to describe
the man’s condition, somewhat unlike Matthew and Mark who use the word paralytic to describe the
sick man.

When they could not find a way to see the Lord through the door into the house they went to the
roof. It was quite common to have a back stairway to gain access to the roof. In any case they
untiled the roof, or took away the tiles which were over the top as water proofing, and got access
into the inside of the house; and so making a wide hole, let down the man upon his couch, or bed,
into the middle of the room, and of the people, just in front of Jesus, where he was sitting.

Those flat roofs was often used as a place of meditation. cf Peter in `Acts 10:9`.

When Jesus saw the faith, both of the paralytic man, and of the men that brought him, which was
shown in the pains they took, and trouble they were at, in getting him to him; he said to the
paralyzed man, “thy sins are forgiven thee”. Both Matthew and Mark say he said "son" whereas Luke
says “man”, and perhaps he used both words.  However, all agree that he pronounced the forgiveness
of sins, which were the cause of his disease; and which being removed, the effect must cease; so
that he had healing both for soul and body.  Once again it is none of our business to know the
nature of the sins, for they are between the man and God, but we know he is healed and forgiven!
`Psalm 103:3-18`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:21-23
    :bold:

The Scribes and Pharisees look at what has happened and hear the Lord Jesus Christ clearly indicate
that He is God, for only God is able to forgive sin, and even know that it is sin that is the issue
here.  They are not wanting to accept that the Messiah has come, for that is just too disruptive to
their life style and religious power structures, and so they use this as a means of attack upon him.

We are told in the Scriptures that sins are committed against God. `Psalm 51:1-14`.  It is clear
therefore that none can forgive sins but God. It is futile for any of the angels in heaven, or good
men on earth to forgive sin, for only God has the power to judge and to forgive. If Christ had been
a mere man, though ever so good a man, or ever so great a prophet, he could not have forgiven sin
and to claim to do so, without the right to do so, is to make him a bad man – for he is either
deluded or a lair!

However He is truly and properly God, as shown by his being able to discern the thoughts of these
men, and his healing the paralytic man in the manner he did.  These things, with all the other
miracles, are sufficient proofs, well more than are needed to prove his claim to be Immanuel.

The Scribes and Pharisees therefore, though they rightly ascribe forgiveness of sin to God alone,
yet miserably fail and sin in imputing blasphemy to Christ. They had a wrong understanding of
Christ, concluding him to be but a mere man, against the light and evidence of his works and
miracles.  There are none so blind as those who will not see, for the truth is too uncomfortable to
them.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:24-25
    :bold:

Jesus Christ now demonstrates that He is God by healing the man physically having healed him
spiritually.

The person whom the Scribes and Pharisees took for a mere man was God as well as man; he was God
manifest in the flesh: It is seen that even in the days of his flesh, whilst he was in his humble
form on earth; He did not cease to be God by becoming man, nor lose any His power by appearing in
the form of a servant.

He tells the paralytic to arise, take up his couch and go home which is exactly what he does. As
soon as these words were spoken by Christ, the man who, before was sick of the palsy, finding
himself perfectly well, got off of his couch, and stood up on his feet before the Scribes and
Pharisees, and all the people, picked up his bed and walked past them on his way home.

A person who minutes before had been a hopeless invalid was completely cured and was walking past
those present glorifying God. This had a great impact on those who saw it.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:26
    :bold:

It was not the Pharisees, and doctors of the law, but the common people who were amazed and
glorified God. They had seen strange things or paradoxes, but in their simplicity, they simply sat
with the reality that was changing their view of what was possible.  Sadly the theologians had
forced their theology over reality and saw all things through their belief system and so excluded
all inconvenient facts.  This remains the danger of man, that we have such fixed ideas that we
cannot accept truth we have not contained and nailed into our system!

The paradox was that they faced the impossible, the unexpected, and an event not known before. No
man, who was so weakened by the palsy, that he needed to be carried on a bed by four men, had ever
before, by a word spoken to him, risen up, and carried his bed on his back, and walked away home
rejoicing.

It is little wonder that they were filled with amazement as well as fear that so mighty a work had
been performed by God in their midst.  `Daniel 7:9-16`.  God has stepped into time and space, and
this unique event was forcing them to step outside their expectations and recognize uniqueness, but
it was too big a challenge to them.

Application
...........

We need to be very persistent in our relationship with the Lord, always open to what he is doing,
not constraining his work by our expectations or fixed viewpoints.  Prayerfulness keeps openness.

We should have the desire to be blessed by the Lord as he desires to bless us, and to serve Him is
to be our prime function in life.

The Lord appreciates the working faith of believers.

Sometimes sin can cause one to become sick and even die.

The Lord will give adequate opportunities for all men to come to a saving knowledge of himself.

We can be impressed and even give thanks to God for his greatness and yet have the wrong concept of
who He is.

Many people who give praise to God are unbelievers, and our job is to give them more adequate
knowledge of who it is they praise.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  CONFESSION AND FORGIVENESS   see page 108`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRIST:  HYPOSTATIC UNION – GOD – MAN   see page 119`
- :doc:`doctrines/SIN:  JEALOUSY   see page 90`
- :doc:`doctrines/BLASPHEMY`
- :doc:`doctrines/GRACE`

Call Of Matthew (levi): His Feast
---------------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:27-32
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:27
    :bold:

There were two types of publicans – tax collectors and customs officials, the latter under Jewish
law being considered worse than tax collectors. Publicanism was a trade forbidden by Pharisaic
Judaism. Jews bought their way into the office. The Romans had a system of “tax farming” – whereby
an amount was fixed to be gathered from each province and the governor would “sell” the right to
collect the taxes to the highest bidder, who then had to return a fixed amount to the Governor, but
could keep all additional monies extorted from the people.

The office of tax collector was given to the highest bidder who knew that he could extort money from
the people without fear of being prosecuted under Roman law.  The key bidder may not get his hands
dirty with the work, but would hire men to collect in each district and report back to him, and
deliver the gold.  Matthew was a member of the lower tax collector class of customs official, and
agent for the owner of the tax concession, and was classified by the Pharisees on the level of a
paid prostitute.

The Pharisees considered the chances of any tax collector repenting as almost impossible, and in a
way they didn't want such disreputable people in their synagogues, and so did not even encourage
repentance from them.  We still must guard ourselves from this mental attitude, that considers some
classes of people as “beneath” us, and the belief that their entry into the church will “lower the
tone”.   `James 1:26` – 2:13.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:28
    :bold:

This was a most unusual act of a customs official, as no one left their post without the agreement
of the Roman forces. Matthew Levi however saw that the authority of Jesus Christ superseded the
authority of any Roman and was willing on that basis to take his chance a leave his post.  He would
get into trouble form his boss, and possibly threat of death.  He left the stall to the underlings
who now could make the money he would have.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:29
    :bold:

Because this is the day of his conversion Matthew throws a large party at this house for his
friends, and they are only the publicans and prostitutes. Because of the great disrepute that these
two groups were held in within Jewish society no other self respecting people would join the party.
This man is overjoyed to be getting out of the dirty business and calls his friends to announce his
“retirement” openly.  The only way to leave the mafia is openly – if you are going to be shot at
least then you will know!  Jesus and his disciples surprise all the “good people” of the town by
attending the feast.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:30-32
    :bold:

The Sanhedrin investigation into this person Jesus of Nazareth is underway with the Scribes of the
Pharisees noting down who was at the party and asking why the Lord Jesus Christ was there. They are
asking themselves that if he is the Messiah how is it that he is eating with the dregs of society.
This man does not behave as they expect at all and they are baffled and disgusted at the company the
Lord keeps.

The dregs of society however realize their position while the critics do not. Until the inquisitors
realize that in God’s sight they are no better than the dregs of society the Lord says He is clearly
not wanted by them, although they like the rest of society desperately need Him.  There is no hope
for the rescue of any man who doesn't think that he needs rescuing.

Application
...........

There is often great intensity and pressure when one is ministering in a very active way and there
is need to spend time reflecting as our Lord appeared to do with the walk beside the sea after the
healing episode in Peter’s house

The Lord always responds to those who actively seek after his teaching and desire to grow in the
knowledge and love of our Lord Jesus Christ.

We may need to leave a prosperous business to follow the Lord, and we need to trust the Lord’s
provision for his journey for us to take form then onwards.

We need to be active in our Christian life and seek the Lord through His word.

Matthew decided immediately to follow the Lord. Great decisions are often made on a moment’s notice.

Matthew Levi is a fine object lesson for business people who put off service to Christ to carry on
their business.

There is a need to recognise that you are unable to please God other than by trusting in the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Until you recognise that you are a sinner in need of a Saviour the Lord cannot help you.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  OBEDIENCE   see page 76`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE - PRIORITIES`

Christ’s Authority Over Tradition
---------------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:33-39
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:33-35
    :bold:

You do not come to a wedding feast to fast but to feast. With the bridegroom present there is
feasting and it is after he leaves that there is time for fasting to get back to your “goal weight”.
There is a time to relax and there is a time to be careful about what you eat, but when there is joy
you should be able to relax and enjoy yourself.  `Ecclesiastes 3:1-8`.

Verse 35 ends with, “then in those days”, while Mark has, “then in that day,” and Matthew only
“then.”  Luke identifies that the Lord was challenging the people to recognize the life changing
reality that had dawned around them.  What would the people do about their promised Messiah.  Since
the days of Moses there had been the expectation that he would come.  Would they celebrate or hide?
`Deuteronomy 13:1-5, 18:17-22`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:36
    :bold:

“Also a parable”. There are three parables here in the answer of Jesus (the bridegroom, the patch on
the garment, the wineskin). They are not called parables except in Luke, but they are nevertheless
parables; stories that illustrate truth in a simple and reflective way, whereby the more you think
upon the example given the more depth of truth emerges.

This illustration indicates that there is a great difference between the Age of the Law as it
presently runs with Jesus present, and the coming Age of Grace, and that there will be dislocation
due to the massive nature of the spiritual changes that come.  `Matthew 5:17, 21, 27, 31`.

What is also in contrast, is that between Rabbinic-Judaism and Christianity there will be
significant difference.  The problem with the Judaism that was dominant in Jesus day, was that it
was ruled over and perverted by the rabbinic interpretations of the Mosaic Law; the Jewish faith of
those days was not the straight teaching of the Old Testament, but the rabbinical interpretation of
the Old Testament, and so the truth was lost in false legalistic religious rules.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:37-38
    :bold:

The old wine skins were often brittle and subject to cracking, as with all things, with age they
lost their elasticity. So it was with the legalism of the Pharisees compared to the new wine of
enthusiasm as shown by the four men that brought their paralytic friend to Christ. They were
incompatible.  These men were old and fossilized into a system that denied all spontaneous
enthusiasm and passion in faith.  They wanted only staid and controllable religious expression – it
was a man’s system that had removed all the work of the Holy Spirit – they were sour grape juice,
not sweet fermented wine.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 5:39
    :bold:

This parable demonstrates the natural reluctance of men in this case to abandon Judaism and to
embrace Christianity. It does not say that eventually he may not proceed but there is a general
holding back from the truth by religious people.  These people have the old and the comfortable.  It
is a shift in the wine analogy, and an interesting one, as it reflects the Lord’s love of good wine,
and good wine is always old, as fresh newly made wine takes time in the bottle to develop deep and
varied flavours.  These people are not open to change at all.

Application
...........

We must always remember that our relationship with God is always based on the grace and mercy of God
not our own works.

Fasting means to do without legitimate functions in life to devote time to Bible study and prayer,
but it can often become a religious “works’ system to prove how spiritual we are.

Religious people, especially if they have a strong ascetic tendency, are hard to evangelise, as they
often believe it is the ritual rather than grace that brings the approbation of God.

Jesus Christ did not come to patch up Pharisaic Judaism, but to return the people to the reality of
genuine Mosaic teaching, and then move on to what Moses looked forward to.

God is pleased by obedience rather than offerings.  `Hosea 6:6, Matthew 9:13, 12:7`.

There is always a conflict between the truth as revealed in the Bible and traditions that have grown
up over a periods of time.

Many people are reluctant to examine their traditions in the light of the Bible.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/GRACE – see page 144`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  FASTING – see page 69`
- :doc:`doctrines/LEGALISM  - see page  112`

