Chapter 3
=========

The Ministry Of John The Baptist At The Jordan
----------------------------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:1-18
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:1
    :bold:

Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar the clock begins to tick again.   Tiberius
became ruler after Augustus Caesar in 14 AD, and so the Baptismal ministry of John the Baptist began
therefore in 29AD.  Luke makes a six-fold fix here to indicate the exact time when John the Baptist
began his ministry.

John the Baptist had revived the function of the ancient prophet, which was a very notable event
after centuries of prophetic silence.

Luke begins with the Roman Emperor, then he mentions Pontius Pilate, Procurator of Judea, Herod
Antipas, Tetrarch of Galilee and Perea, Philip, Tetrarch of Iturea and Trachonitis, Lysanias,
Tetrarch of Abilene.   Each of these characters can be independently researched.  Luke is a very
careful historian and he wants to fix this date carefully, as it ties in directly with the prophetic
word of `Daniel 9:24-27`.

The ancients did not have our modern system of chronology, and so the names of rulers mentioned here
was the common way of fixing any date. Objection has been made to the mention of Lysanias here
because Josephus in his Antiquities tells of a Lysanias who was King of Abila up to 36 BC, as the
one referred to by Luke with the wrong date.  But an inscription has been found on the site of
Abilene with mention of “Lysanias the tetrarch”, and at the time to which Luke refers.  So Luke the
great historian is vindicated again by archaeological finds.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:2
    :bold:

The group of official political-religious leaders concludes with the high-priesthood of Annas and
Caiaphas (son-in-law and successor of Annas).  They are linked as they are related and worked
together to control both politics and religion.

Luke alone tells of the coming of the word to John. Ginomai the word translated come is in the
aorist middle indicative indicating that it was to John’s benefit that the Word of God came to him.

John is introduced as the son of Zacharias according to Chapter 1. Matthew describes him as the
Baptist, Mark as the Baptizer. No other Gospel mentions Zacharias/Zechariah. Mark begins his Gospel
here, but Matthew and Luke as we have seen have two chapters before dealing with the infancy of
Jesus Christ and John.

All three Synoptics locate him “in the wilderness” with Matthew adding “of Judea”.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:3
    :bold:

“All the region round about Jordan”.  The wilderness was John’s abode so that he began preaching
where he was. It was the plain or valley of the Jordan, El Ghor, as far north as Succoth. Sometimes
he was on the eastern bank of the Jordan though usually on the west side. His baptizing kept him
near the river.

The baptism of repentance unto remission of sins. The word remission occurs in Luke more frequently
than in all the other New Testament writers combined.  In medical writings the idea of remission is
the stopping of a disease.  The King was coming and so the people needed to purify their hearts,
minds and bodies, and prepare to meet the serve the Messiah.  Sin would render them unfaithful and
unable to be sued as holy vessels, and so repentance from sin and remission/cleansing/healing from
sins prepared people for their life a servants of Messiah.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:4-6
    :bold:

Here we have the regular formula for quotation, perfect passive indicative of “grapho”.  The word
“pharagx” translated valley is used only here in the New Testament. It is a ravine or valley hedged
in by precipices.  The prophetic passage is in `Isaiah 40:3-5`.

“Shall be filled”. In 1845 when the Sultan visited Brusa the inhabitants were called out to clear
the roads of rocks and to fill up the hollows. Oriental monarchs often did this very thing. A royal
courier would go ahead to issue the call and the roads would be smoothed for the leader’s visit.
`Isaiah 2:11-17, 35:6-8, 61:1-3`.

So the Father (in advance of Messiah) sends his herald John before him, to prepare the way for him.
Isaiah described the preparation for the Lord’s triumphal march, and John used it with great force.
John is here telling the Jews to ready themselves for the arrival of the Messiah.   The prophecy of
Daniel meant that all who could calculate the years knew that 32 AD, three years after John begins
was the time for Messiah to ride into Jerusalem.  Daniel’s prophecy was that exact.  Refer to the
EBCWA Commentary on `Daniel 9:24-27`.

“The salvation of God” talks about the saving act of God. This phrase well describes Luke’s Gospel,
which has in mind the message of Christ for all men. It is the universal Gospel that is about to
unfold before men in the person of the Messiah.  `Psalm 98:1-6`.   The good news of salvation is
made personal in the person and work of Jesus.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:7-10
    :bold:

Here John talks to the religious group who have come to be baptised. He keeps on calling them a
generation of vipers as shown by the imperfect tense of the word lego. He did not make one comment
but kept on telling them. This is a dramatic confrontation, using language from 700 to 1000 years
before.  `Psalm 58:3-5, 66:18, Isaiah 59:1-8`.

Luke gives us a very short summary of John’s preaching to the crowds with special replies to these
inquiries: the multitudes [v 10], the publicans [v 12], and the soldiers [v 14].  “To be baptized of
him”, indicates that this is the purpose of their coming.  The people coming to him to prepare their
hearts for destiny are the sinners of the nation, but their “root” is the religious system, and
sadly the axe is going to be laid to the root of the tree – for the root is corrupt.  `Isaiah
10:33-34, Ezekiel 15:1-5, 31:18, Daniel 4:13-17, 23-27, 34-37, Romans 11:1-27`.   Those who are
“fruitful” and repentant will need, at this point, to “come out” of the nation to be saved.  `John
15:1-17, Hebrews 13:8-16`.   Paul is led to the same image as John and Daniel use, and like with
Nebuchadnezzar’s life, there is hope in the end for salvation later.

We note in verse 8 the participle preceding the action of the main verb where the tree is cut down
[participle] before being cast into fire [indicative mood].  It is the coming judgment that is in
view by this prophet, exactly as with the Psalmist (warning of Egyptian attacks later after
Solomon’s death), Isaiah warning of the Assyrian menace, and destruction of the Northern Kingdom,
and Jeremiah/Ezekiel warning of the loss of the Southern Kingdom to Babylonian power.  This time the
nation will not re-bud in the land for 1900 years.

What shall we do, then? - John had told them to show fruit appropriate to repentance, or to lead a
life which showed that their repentance was genuine. Jesus will build upon their very Jewish
challenge in his own early ministry.  `Matthew 7:13-23`.  They very properly, therefore, asked how
it should be done, or what “would be” such an obedient life.

Asked is in the Imperfect tense, which indicates that they repeatedly asked. “What then must we do?”
They knew that the coming king would demand actions appropriate for his majesty – what were they to
be?  `Acts 2:37, 4:12, 9:6, 16:30-31, James 2:12-26`.  John will give them a real practical
challenge.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:11
    :bold:

The verb answereth Apokrinomai is in the passive deponent form, which means it is in a passive form,
but has an active meaning.  They are to receive a spirit of humility and caring, and respond
actively to assist those in greater need to themselves.  They are going to be asked to do what they
can, not endanger their own financial and physical survival by showing charity.

The word “coats” in the Greek is the word “chiton” which is the inner and less expensive and
necessary working garment. The outer expensive and indispensable protection against the cold at
night, the “Himation”, is not mentioned. Few would have two large outer garments amongst the poorer
people, but some may have a pair of working garments, and they could give a poorer brother one of
them and show their concern, as that would enable to brother to go into the market place and secure
work without shame.

We should note the specific and very different message to each class. John puts his finger on the
weaknesses of the people right before him, but also upon simple and effective actions that each can
do to show that their hearts are indeed right before the Lord.  `Isaiah 58:6-12`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:12-13
    :bold:

Publicans were the corrupt and ruthless tax collectors who worked for the Romans or for the Herodian
dynasties in the “tax farming” activities that amassed vast fortunes for the wealthy and kept the
poor just below the line of well being. It is sometimes coupled with sinners or prostitutes, and
represent the moral and social outcasts of society.  These were people who would not be able to
enter a synagogue at all, and would be in danger without guards in any market place.

The word for publican Telones is made up from telos, tax, and oneomai, to buy, and is an old word.
The collector of taxes was not popular anywhere, but least of all when a Jew collected taxes for the
Romans, and did it by terrible graft and extortions against their own people and gave their money to
the conqueror.

The verb “exact” means only to do or practice, but early the tax-collectors learned how to “do” the
public as regular “blood-suckers”.  John pointedly tells them to prove their readiness to receive
the king by stopping extortionate demands on top of what they were entitled to collect.  They could
make their “margin” and pay their bills, but they were to stop the doubling of the profit margin by
graft and threat.  “Steal no more”.  `Ephesians 4:25-32`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:14
    :bold:

The word soldier looks like a noun but is in fact a verb and probably should be translated, “and
those who soldier”, and could have wider implications than the fighting man. Some of these
soldiers/mercenaries acted as police to help the tax collectors. They were often rough and cruel and
demanded additional money under threats of violence that they would certainly carry out.

The phrase, “Do violence to no man”, is seen here only in the New Testament. It means to shake
thoroughly like an earthquake and so violently as to terrify, to extort money or property by
intimidating. This was a constant temptation to soldiers. Might does not make right with John or
Jesus.

“Neither exact anything wrongfully”.  In Athens those whose business it was to inform against any
one whom they might find exporting figs out of Attica were called fig-showers or sycophants. From
the time of Aristophanes on it was used for any informer for financial gain.

These soldiers were tempted to obtain money by informing against the rich, so the word comes to mean
to accuse falsely.  The sycophants came to be a regular class of informers or slanderers in Athens.
Socrates is quoted by Xenophon as actually advising Crito to employ one in self-defence, like the
modern way of using one gunman against another.

Demosthenes pictures a sycophant as one who “glides about the market like a scorpion, with his
venomous sting all ready, spying out whom he may surprise with misfortune, and ruin and from whom he
can most easily extort money, by threatening him with an action dangerous in its consequences”.

“Be content with your wages”.  Discontent with wages was a complaint of mercenary soldiers. This
word for wages was originally anything cooked such as cooked food, and bought hence, “rations,”
“pay,” or wages. “Wages” for soldiers were often the looted contents of pillages houses, and so the
soldiers are urged to treat their fellow citizens as friends, not enemies.

Paul uses the singular of this word for a preacher’s pay in `2 Corinthians 11:8`, and the plural of
the wages of sin, `Romans 6:23`, showing death is the wages of sin.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:15
    :bold:

“Were in expectation”. These people are amazed at what is happening, but also expectant of the
messiah coming, and so wondered about the true identity of John. John’s preaching about the Messiah
and the kingdom of God stirred the people deeply and set them to wondering. “Whether he were the
Christ or not”.  John did no miracles and was not in David’s line and yet he moved people so
mightily that they began to suspect that he himself was the Messiah.

The Sanhedrin one day sends a formal committee to ask him this direct question. `John 1:19`.   This
was the ultimate test for all people in the public eye, to claim more than they are entitled to
claim.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:16
    :bold:

“He that is mightier than I’, as in `Mark 1:7`, is the ablative case of comparison and should be
translated, “the one mightier than I”.   John was in no doubt about his mission and status, and
would not turn aside for the flattery of the crowd. He was able to take his own measure in
comparison with the Messiah, and was loyal to him.

Luke also has “fire” here, after “baptize with the Holy Ghost”, as we see also in `Matthew 3:11`.
This picture in the Synoptic Gospels shows that John the Baptist saw the Messiah’s coming as a
judgment upon the world like fire, and the winnowing fork separating the good wheat from the chaff,
with the latter being consumed with unquenchable fire.  Jesus will speak about this in `John
15:1-17`.

He also was given the prophetic message about the baptism in the Holy Spirit, which will occur some
three years later at the feast of Pentecost in 32 AD.  John understood part of his message, and will
later seek confirmation from Jesus about certain things, but even though his understanding was
partial his obedience to preaching the total message was complete.  He did all that he was ordered
to, even though lacking some details – he mentors obedience in so doing, for many times we will have
only inadequate information, but enough to preach faithfully!

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:17
    :bold:

It is noted that in the Luke passage the purging and gathering of the wheat is in the aorist tense
and the infinitive mood, indicating the purpose of this action at a point in time at the Second
Advent, whilst in the parallel passage in Matthew it is in the future tense and indicative mood
showing a future event. The vocabulary however is exactly the same.  Remember John’s messages were
given multiple times and each time there would be some variation of the wording.  `Jeremiah 15:5-9`.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:18
    :bold:

Many other exhortations literally means many and different things did John evangelize, to the
people. Luke has given a brief sample of the wonderful messages of the Baptist.  `Proverbs 8:1-13,
32-36, 9:1-12`.

Few of his words are preserved but they give a definite and powerful concept of his preaching.  This
man was faithful to his call, and we are to be faithful to our own today.   It is not the memory of
men that produces the eternal rewards that matter, but the well done of God alone that we need to
seek.  John had his eyes on God the Father, and so must we if we seek his accolades.

_**PROPHECY**_

**MESSENGER BEFORE THE LORD**

PROPHECY

**`Malachi 3:1` **(425 BC): Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before
me: and the LORD, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the
covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the LORD of hosts.

Malachi prophesied of the provision of a messenger to precede the Lord, to preach the good news and
prepare the way for his arrival.

FULFILLMENT

**`Mark 1:2;` **[30 AD]** - **As it is written in the prophets, Behold, I send my messenger before
thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

**`Luke 1:76,77` **[30 AD] And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest: for thou
shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways; 77  To give knowledge of salvation unto
his people by the remission of their sins,

**`Luke 7:27,28` **(30 AD): This is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before
thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. 28  For I say unto you, Among those that are born
of women there is not a  greater prophet than John the Baptist: but he that is least in the kingdom
of God is greater than he.

1 . John the Baptist is shown to be the messenger before the Lord predicted by Malachi.

2. John prepared the way for Jesus Christ by calling the attention of the Jews to the need to
repent.

3. John is stated to be the greatest of the prophets, but less than the least in the kingdom of
heaven: showing that the greatest which man can do is far less than what God can do through man, or
what we will be like in our future state **(`1 Corinthians 15:22`)**.

Application
...........

Some preachers start with crowds and drive them away, and yet they serve the Lord in truth.  Some
are called to popular ministries and they gather great crowds.  The difference between the two
ministries may not be the content, it may simply reflect the spiritual state of the hearers.  Do not
judge ministries by popularity, but by obedience to the Lord’s revealed Word.

We all have different roles to play in the plan of God, and we should find out what that role is and
develop it under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, and be obedient to the Word alone.

We should not compromise with powerful people if it is going to spoil our testimony for the Lord.
His verdict alone matters.

We must remember that we represent the Lord Jesus Christ on this earth and to him must go all the
glory, and to Him alone we give final account.

We also are voices for our Lord, telling others about Him ensuring that we do not embellish the
truth

We do not need to be in a prominent position in society to be effective in our Christian walk

If we are challenged by religion we are to separate from it so that we do not become compromised in
our Christian walk.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/JOHN THE BAPTIST – HERALD [see page 34]`
- :doc:`doctrines/BAPTISM`
- :doc:`doctrines/BAPTISM OF FIRE`
- :doc:`doctrines/BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT`
- :doc:`doctrines/THE FAMILY OF HEROD AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.`

John The Baptist Reproves Herod
-------------------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:19-20
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:19-20
    :bold:

The account, which the Jewish writer David Ganz gives of this Herod, and of this fact of John's
reproving of him for it, and the consequence of it, perfectly agrees with these statements by Luke.

Herod Antipater, and there are some that call him, "the tetrarch", was a son of Herod the Great, and
brother of Archelaus and Philip.  He was an evil member of an evil family that would yet play an
important part in the plan of God – their very evil actions fulfilling prophetic truth without them
realising it.  These people lived in a fantasy world, built upon the blood of their subjects and
they didn't care about that, for they worshipped power and lust itself and believed they were so
special that they could do anything and their paid religious leaders would always exonerate them on
God’s behalf!

He was the third king of the family of Herod, and was a very wicked man without any hesitation to do
evil for his own ends.   He was a totally self centred, narcissistic man.  He had no conscience
about the death of good men who opposed him in any way, indeed ruthlessness was almost required in
this day to survive.  Many wise men of Israel he simply killed with the sword, and on a trip to Rome
he took the wife of his brother Philip, whilst he was away, initially as a mistress and then
recognizing her as his wife, even though this led to divorcing his earlier wife and entailed a war
with the father of his first wife.  Thousands died so he could run away with Herodias.   John,
because he rebuked him for this evil before God and men, he arrested, and then would execute after
Salome’s dance.

It is an interesting psychological fact that those who are totally narcissistic often are drawn to
moral figures, and enjoy speaking with them and hearing their moral theories.  The narcissism of the
evil men protect them from any conscience reactions, as they do not believe they are guilty, for
they believe that they are “special” and above the laws of other men.   Herod had had a particular
respect for John as a prophet, and probably thought that John would be impressed by their
conversations and stop publically criticising him, and then he could let him go.  The evil plans of
Herodias however put paid to that fantasy.

Application
...........

It is important for Christians when they are confronted with outright evil to stand up and be
counted as the Holy Spirit leads.   Let us remember however that an evil man cleaning his life up
does not save him, and our focus is always to be salvation of the lost, not morally clean unsaved
people walking to hell with bibles under their arms!

Remember the Holy Spirit’s ministry is to convict of “Sin” (rejection of Christ as Saviour), of
“Righteousness”(for man by his own efforts, no matter how clean and moral cannot reach God’s
righteous standards), and of “Judgment” (the Great White Throne Judgment of all the lost –
`Revelation 20:11-15`.).  `John 16:8-11`.

If we are going to be unpopular for preaching sin, then let us be sure that it is the post-Cross sin
of rejection of the Saviour that we preach, not any moral sins.  In John’s day he was right to stand
and convince Herod of sins against the Mosaic Law, but we have no such mandate today.  Our message
of the need to repent and accept the Saviour must be done in love and care for the eternal destiny
of the lost, with the object of turning the person or group to face the light of God’s Word.

Changes of actions can improve the situation but only regeneration through faith in Christ through
the Holy Spirit’s power can save the individual.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/JOHN THE BAPTIST – HERALD [see page 34]`
- :doc:`doctrines/GOD:  DIVINE INSTITUTIONS - MARRIAGE`
- :doc:`doctrines/SIN:  JEALOUSY`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRISTIAN LIFE:  SUFFERING`

Jesus Baptised By John
----------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:21-23A
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:21
    :bold:

“When all the people were baptized” is merely a general statement that Jesus was baptized in
connection with or at the same time of the baptizing of the people as a whole. There was a vast
crowd being baptized and Jesus was just one of many, unnoticed by the crowd until the dramatic
announcement from heaven occurs.

“Jesus also having been baptized”, is merely introductory to the descent of the Holy Spirit and the
audible voice of the Father.

Luke however also mentions that Jesus was praying as this happened. The natural meaning of this is
that the heaven was opened while Jesus was praying though not necessarily in answer to his prayer.

Notice the word opened is the Greek word Anoigo, which is in contrast with the word Schizo, to be
split asunder, or divided, as in Mark’s account of this dramatic moment and shows the value of a
harmony approach to the Gospels.  Both meanings together give the full drama of the event.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:22
    :bold:

In a bodily form. This additional element is alone mentioned in Luke who has also “as a dove” like
Matthew and Mark. This probably means that John the Baptist saw the vision that looked like a dove.
`Genesis 1:2, 8:8-14`.

The symbolism of the dove for the Holy Spirit is intelligible. We are not to understand that this
was the beginning of the Incarnation of Christ as the Cerinthian Gnostics held but demonstrated the
relationship between the Lord Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit and the demonstration to John the
Baptist that Jesus was indeed the Christ or Messiah of Israel.

The Trinity here manifest themselves at the baptism of Jesus which constitutes the formal entrance
of Jesus upon his Messianic ministry. He enters upon it with the Father’s blessing and approval and
with the power of the Holy Spirit upon him.

.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:23
    :bold:

“Began to be about thirty years of age”. Tyndale has it right , “Jesus was about thirty yere of age
when he beganne.”

Luke does not commit himself definitely to precisely thirty years as the age of Christ. The Levites
entered upon full service at that age, but that proves nothing about Jesus. God’s prophets entered
upon their task when the word of God comes to them.

Application
...........

Here we see obedience in the action of John the Baptist. He had been told by God to go into the
wilderness and baptize people in the Jordan at the place of eternity where 1500 years previously
Joshua, whose name also means Shepherd, had placed stones representing identification with the
Messiah.

He did this until he saw Jesus, and saw the dove coming down on Him, showing this is the “Lamb of
God who taketh away the sins of the world”.

All sin was put on the Lord Jesus Christ who paid the penalty for all men so that all could be
saved. He thus provided unlimited atonement.

Thus all men have the door of reconciliation open to them with the righteousness and justice of God
perfectly satisfied by the perfect sacrifice.

Faith is the response of the unbeliever as he recognises what God has done for him.

The Calvinist however says that Christ died only for the sins of believers.

The fact is however that Christ died for the sins of the whole world, but it is only brought through
to a satisfactory conclusion by those who do believe.

It also rejects the liberal view, which says all will be saved in the end. This is why liberal
ministers can give Christian burials to all sorts of people, believers as well as unbelievers.

A person has to decide what he is going to do with the Lamb of God, will he accept, ignore or
reject.

To be known by the Lord and to know Him is the most important thing in life. It is far more
important than any great emotional experience.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/HOLY SPIRIT:  SYMBOLS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT`

Genealogy Of Christ
-------------------


.. biblepassage:: Luke 3:23B-38
    :bold:
    :title:

Background And Analysis
.......................











Application
...........

There is no conflict in the harmony of these passages, as that of Matthew deals with the line of
Joseph, while that of Luke relates to the line of Mary. They have a common lineage from Abraham to
David.

The line of Christ increasingly was known and understood by Satan from the commencement of prophecy
in `Genesis 3:15` to His death on the Cross.

The Plan of God goes on throughout history. History is in fact His story and irrespective of what
men or angels attempt in their arrogance to thwart the plan God’s purposes will be accomplished to
the letter and to the time frame scheduled by God. God never changes and his plan always works out
and always will work out 100%.

Doctrines
.........

- :doc:`doctrines/ANGELS:  SATAN AND SATANIC ATTACK`
- :doc:`doctrines/1.- Pre Adamic`
- :doc:`doctrines/2. - Stage 1 - Innocence-Sinfulness`
- :doc:`doctrines/ScriptureRemarks`
- :doc:`doctrines/3. - Stage 2 - Attack on the Line of the Saviour`
- :doc:`doctrines/4.	Stage 3. Attack on the Person of Christ`
- :doc:`doctrines/5. Stage 4. -  Attacks since the Cross.`
- :doc:`doctrines/6.	Strategy of Satan at the Present Satan's strategy is divided into 3 sections.`
- :doc:`doctrines/ANGELS:  SATANIC ATTACK ON BELIEVERS`
- :doc:`doctrines/CHRIST: - SEED – CHRIST THE SEED`

